In honor of the 5th anniversary of the Origins Project last year, I interviewed Origins director and founder Lawrence Krauss in his office to talk about this history of the program, and where it is headed in the future. Below is an abridged transcript of that conversation.
Lisa Winter: I'd like to just talk about the Origins Project. What made you really want to start that, and where did you get the idea?
LK: Well, that's a good question. It came, it happened in two different ways. At my old university, I had been thinking of ways to try and— I'd already begun a cosmology program, and I'd been thinking of ways to try and increase, and I'd also begun to work with organizations like the medical school. And the idea that certain problems, fundamental problems, needed an interdisciplinary approach had already begun to gel in my mind. Plus, I wanted to think of ways that would capture the public's imagination beyond just cosmology, and interest nationwide. I started thinking about the idea of origins, that everything of interest, in some sense, the forefront questions in all the areas of human activity in some sense relates to origins. So, I began to try and create that program at my old university, amidst all of the bureaucratic obstacles of a standard university. Around that time, I came to visit ASU. I was giving a public lecture here, I was invited actually by Paul Davies, who was the first public lecturer of his program. I had never been to Phoenix; I had never been to ASU. Paul somehow had the wisdom, I suppose, or whatever; I had a breakfast with Michael Crow, the president [of ASU]. I was impressed by him right away, he was waiting for us at breakfast with our handlers, and I began to talk to him about origins and it turned out that they'd been thinking—since, of course, ASU is the hallmark of the New American University and transcending these 19th century disciplines. They'd begun to think along somewhat similar lines, and we discussed the possibility of creating a program where we could combine the best minds from different fields to explore what the questions were and maybe lead to new research, combined with an outreach program and educational program. I went back to my old university and within a month or so I got a call from ASU and so began the saga, beginning with an offer that I couldn't refuse. One of which was to lead this Origins program; to create it and lead it. It was a large and daunting task because nothing existed, but the university—unlike my old university—put the resources behind it. When you want to make something happen here, they help make it happen, and if it succeeds, they support it. It's been that way ever since. I wanted to begin it with a bang by creating the biggest, best event for all of science and scholarship that had ever happened anywhere, and there were a lot of people that were interested here, but I think skeptical. Getting everyone together turned out to be an amazing event. It really was. We brought 100 of the most well-known scientists and scholars from around the world here for an amazing series of panels, where everyone listened to panels from different fields and one of the things we heard was that they had never been at a conference like that, where they could hear so much of what was going on with different fields. And then we had 6,000 people at Gammage Auditorium for 12 hours, listening to science. And that created the precedent, which we've tried to continue. For me, it's just been like the kid in the candy store. Really, it was the opportunity to look at the most interesting questions beyond my own field, of course in my own field, and the university supported me by helping me create a cosmology group here. The most interesting questions that you might want to ask, and getting the best people around, and having a great weekend listening, so it's just been wonderful. I try to pass that on to the public by making these wonderful events and also, I guess, in the process,  especially at the first event, I realized how well-connected I was. In the sense that basically, almost everyone I talked to agreed to come, in one way or another. Sometimes people who charge a lot of money but I had done favors for them and vice versa, so it was very gratifying to get so many people willing to come here, because I was here in some sense and that sort of snowballed. Now that we have this amazing tradition, people from outside are always shocked to see that we can fill up 2,000-3,000 seat auditorium with paying members of the public for science. I think it's so great. It says so much for the people here; it says so much for the university for being willing to go out on a limb and support it, and I think it also says what I believe and what you probably believe, which is that people are crying out for science! People are fascinated! Everyone thinks people aren't, but they are! It's what I said at the last panel, the last Great Debate: This is interesting, because people want to know this stuff, and people are fascinated by the fundamental ultimate questions. As long as they're fascinated, we're going to keep on fascinating them.   
LW: What has been the most fascinating topic for you so far? What have you learned the most from?
LK: Well, you know, what's interesting for me is that at each one, I learn different things about different fields. I learn about different standards of proof, for example. It's interesting, because if you're asking cutting-edge questions, you find that maybe the time isn't right for them. I think, for example, we had a meeting on the Origins of Human Uniqueness, which was fascinating and had a very broad group, from paleontologists to geneticists to anthropologists, economists. There were archeologists, there were psychologists, there were all sorts of groups. And it was sort of like the blind man and the elephant, you know, because everyone approached it from a different point of view. What was clear was that there wasn't necessarily any uniform consensus, moreover, it wasn't clear that people were yet ready… the tools might not be at hand, the genetic tools (to link genes to behavior, for example). We're a long way away, I think, so that was a learning experience for me. Each one has been a challenge in its own ways, especially for the public parts of it, to manage it and each one, therefore, I have different memories of the challenges of that. I think there are few that come to mind, also some of the workshops have been interesting because they've had a purpose with an agenda to try and produce something. Our climate change workshop, which is an area of great interest to me, and I learned a great deal, wanted to produce a document that would lead to some change, and we tried to promote the idea of carbon capture. I'm not sure we've been successful with continuing to work on that. We had one on xenophobia which, I think from a public point of view was fascinating, but also for the workshop, we're trying to produce an article for the Proceedings of the National Academy [of Sciences]. The Origins of Life one was another fascinating one because it's obviously in an area of interest to me. Not only do I learn about different standards of proof by different fields, but it's interesting to see different scientists present data and then see other scientists say, "That wouldn't convince us in our field," which is important to know that that's different in different fields. More than that, I guess I came away more convinced than ever that maybe the route to life is unique. You often wonder, on other planets, are there different base pairs for DNA, is it something other than ATP that's used for energy, is there a different basis of life? Listening to the chemists, when we started to think about an RNA world and how it might develop, you know, I don't know if I have a strong reason for feeling this way, but I wouldn't be surprised if chemistry (afterall, it's chemistry that turns into biology) if chemistry dictated the nature of life and if chemistry, more or less, provided a unique path to a self-replicating organism that could eventually become life. I maybe wrong, but it'd be interesting to see, if we discover life elsewhere that isn't connected to us, like our solar system it's obvious it's connected, but if we ever, in the future, go beyond that to see if it's different. But I wouldn't be surprised if it's based on the same kind of chemistry in that. It's fascinating, because it means somehow the laws of physics and chemistry ultimately lead to a unique solution that nature's found by initially random processes, then of course the directed process of natural selection. Of course, I think there are few other things I'll always remember. I'll remember that when we had our science and culture event, a whole weekend of science and culture, it was an amazing set of events. We had an orchestra, I narrated the host of the planets and Stephen Hawking gave a lecture, but my friends Cormac McCarthy and Werner Herzog here and it was a wonderful combination. We did Science Friday, and it was one of those memorable Science Fridays, because it was me, Cormac, and Werner in a studio, where they were talking mostly about science, and I was just listening to these two cultural icons show that you don't have to be a scientist to not only like science, but actually to know something about it. It wasn't just "oh, I like science," they knew about early modern humans because Werner's movie Cave of Forgotten Dreams was showing that weekend. That was really memorable to me. And the Storytelling of Science event we had. We had an amazing set of people on stage, and of course, again, if you're on stage, choreographing it is one thing, and knowing how to play off the people there, and I think I was very pleased with how it went and how I handled things, but each [panelist] rose to the occasion and reminded me of a jazz session. Because I really gave everyone an open-ended challenge. Someone said "well that's great, but how's the next person gonna do it?" and it was like jazz riffs where each person's motivated by the one before. In fact, to some extent I find that in each of our panels, but that one really reminded me of [jazz] and the creativity on that stage, and of course, the public ate it up. From the point of view of storytellers about science, not necessarily scientists, but storytellers of science, it was probably unparalleled, I suspect, of anywhere at anytime to have that group and that kind of event, and I know there was a reaction of the public that I think was great. Besides having the wrestling on stage [between Bill Nye and Brian Greene], I was about to call it Celebrity Scientist Mud Wrestling.
LW: How do you decide the theme of each event?
LK: Well, that's a good question. I mean, we're trying to create a more ordered process for that, starting with suggestions from faculty and proposals, and we're actually creating an organization using our external board members. We have this amazing external board with five Nobel laureates and all the great scientists and scholars from around the world, so it's really amazing. We created four different focus areas for Origins: cosmos, planets, cells and life, and the future of technology. Each of which has fascinating origins questions. We're going to use our board members in combination with people internally from the University to create a working group in each area to suggest workshops down the road. Right now, sometimes it's opportunities, we take advantage of those, and sometimes it's "what can we do next?" so there's always a backlog of ideas. The Science and Culture thing, for example, we thought after doing all this, it's really important to connect those things. But for example, Climate Change was partly organized because we have a visiting scholar from Columbia who's here for two months a year: Wally [Wallace] Broecker who is a National Medal of Science winner. That's a key question; of course that's a key issue we want to look into. We thought of themes, one year was Science and Culture. This year we went through all of the themes as part of our 5th anniversary. We're thinking of a bunch of topics, from the Origins of Dogs to the Origins of Extinctions that we're looking to in the future. I think we'll have a theme maybe next year or the year after which is the anthropocene, which is the era of humans, and how it's affecting climate and the planet. We'll look at everything from the evolution of certain materials on Earth to the extinctions. It's going to be a fascinating year. But we will try to work out two years in advance. Generally, it's been one year in advance. But there's a lot of fascinating questions, and it's often a matter of finding out what topics are fascinating, just keeping your ear to the ground and saying, "Oh, this is neat" and then getting a core group of really good people to help coordinate it. Steve Pinker's doing our Violence thing this year, for example, and Morality was another one that there had become a lot of discussion about science and morality, so it seemed like a good time to do it. The opportunity for Richard [Dawkins] and I to do a dialogue, which we've done at other universities, so it seemed a shame not to do one here. So, it's taking advantage of opportunities as well as trying to think about what topics are exciting. Xenophobia actually happened because I had been thinking about Arizona's illegal immigrant issue, you know, this is such a hotbed for that. I thought we could have an event that would look at that. We decided not to do that eventually, and made it broader, but that's what motivated that.
LW: How do you choose who to invite onto the panel?
LK: Well, that's a good question. What we usually do, you know, if we're going to have a public panel, we have to have a mixture. If we're doing it on science, we want great scientists, but we also want people who can communicate to the public and are going to be exciting, and, on the whole, we want people that the public may have heard of. If you're doing it for 100 people, that's one thing, but if you're doing it for 2,000, you've got a tight combination of things, and that limits what you can do. What I like to do is get a few people who are key individuals in a given field, who I know can communicate, and also get a few people that are—and they may be one and the same—who are well-known to the public and build something around them. So, it's a matter of getting the few individuals first. And, I've always discovered this while organizing the workshops, if you get a few major players and you invite others, everyone will want to come, because they want to be a part of it. To some extent, it's the same in the panel. Sometimes the makeup of the panel isn't decided until the last minute, because sometimes there are a lot of good people and we have to choose. It's a dynamic as well as individuals, so it's me trying to put together something that I think will flow and the people will play off of one another. Usually, we succeed in that, but it's always a challenge. We've got a lot of people who often have their own agendas or their own styles and try to mesh it together, because we're not providing just information, but we're providing an entertaining evening. To put that together requires more than just picking people and letting it happen or picking a topic and letting it happen, it has to be choreographed more than people might imagine. 
LW: Is there anyone that you have wanted to get who has been unavailable?
LK: Oh, there's been a ton of them. There's lots of people that say no. A friend of mine who's a well-known director, whose name I won't mention, has often said that people think anyone he wants for a movie will often say yes, but that's not true at all. So there are lots of people we want to get, and some of them have said no three or four times, not because they don't want to do it, but because the timing doesn't work out. There are other people who I'd like to get, but have a rule that they won't talk without getting a lot of money. But generally, if I've done them a favor, I can con them into doing me one, and there are a few people we've had who are on that list, who would otherwise charge a lot of money, but they owe me. There are other people who simply charge a lot of money and, on the whole, we haven't gone that route. To answer the question that's in the back of many people's minds is that we've struck out most often with women. We really want to try and have diversity in our panel, but there are few women scientists who, because of the fact that they're well-known women in science, get asked to do so many different things, that we just find it impossible. That's happened with a number of female Nobel Prize Winners, over and over again, there's some other people whose names you would know and we've never been able to do it because they're either over-subscribed or they demand a lot of money. We've tried to think outside the box, and we try to get people who are hard to reach sometimes, and sometimes we can't get through to them directly if I don't know them, and that makes it a lot harder. But, we'll keep trying. I don't want to mention names, but it's not as if everyone says yes and what happens is that we come up with an idea for an ideal panel, and we'll ask five people and only two of them may be able to do it. And then we may change the nature of the panel to accommodate those two and think of other possibilities. It's often a juggling act until the last minute. 
LW: What is coming up for the Origins Project? Do you have any new avenues you'll be exploring?
LK: Yeah, there are a few things. Besides changing the structure with these four committees who will really enhance and add a thematic structure, that I think will help us make the scholarly workshops more important and useful and maybe increase funding. We're looking at a bunch of other options. One is with partnering with groups around the world. The Sydney Opera House has asked to begin an Origins South, for example, and we may do events there. We're thinking of doing Origins events outside of Phoenix. We're also looking at ways to have mini-courses attached to some of our workshops. For Water, we have someone talking about a mini-course in water issues, and I may do a mini-course this term, which would be a new idea. We've been talking for a long time about education. We've tried K-12 and we've tried a bunch of different things, as well as at the University, so we're looking at that avenue. It's a matter of building the resources now. We're trying to grow and we're trying to do it with a very small staff, so we're trying to grow the funding and the staff, and then we can become more ambitious about all of those things. Right now, it's a few people doing a lot. We're going to reach out into education here on campus and K-12, and try to reach out internationally by partnering. Those are a few things, and then increasing our workshops. Ultimately, I'd like to raise money to be able to have term-long workshops where we could really bring in the best people in the world to really look at a problem and maybe make significant progress. 
"On the Origins of the Origins Project." Personal interview. 7 Feb. 2014.
* Interview
 * Lawrence Krauss
 * Great Debate
 * ASU
