Do you like to travel?I adore traveling. There's not much I enjoy more than being out on the road headed for a place I've never been before.
What were the last three names anyone called you?Dandelion, Smooch-a-Saurus, Lambiekins.
What exactly  Owl City?A city where happy owls live, work, breathe, ride bikes and fly kites. They pick flowers, sing in the shower, salsa dance, swim in pools, knit sweaters and read dreamy books with happy endings. They roller skate, watch romantic movies, drive clean cars to church, hold hands on the beach and run on treadmills after they eat a lot of pizza. They enjoy vanilla skies, swinging on swing sets, walking in the rain, pajama parties, wearing fuzzy sweatshirts in the winter and imagining what it would be like to breathe underwater. Owl City is an innocent place where life is pleasant and enjoyable. It's a place where pretty owl girl flight attendants smile at handsome boy owls at 30,000 feet. It's a place where little owls sometimes get lost in grocery stores but they always find their momma's again. =]
What were the last two things you had to drink?Lemonade and pool water.
What was the last music video you watched?"2 Legit 2 Quit" by MC Hammer. I couldn't even handle how legit it was.
What's another word for thesaurus?Synonym-finder.
What happens when you're driving on the interstate and your cell phone rings?I freak out and spill whatever I'm drinking all over myself.
Are you a Christian?Yes. Jesus Christ is my everything. I've given Him control of my life, asked Him to come into my heart to work in my life and change me into a new person, someone He wants me to be. I strive to honor Christ in everything I do, say, make and think. Nothing is more important to me than my relationship with Him.
What drew you to electronic music?I was in a few different bands in high school and eventually got bored with the traditional guitar, bass, drums setup. I was always a huge fan of electronic music and it was a new medium to experiment with. I got a sequencing program and just started making songs.
So your dad never had a 4-track recorder or an analog synth laying around the house while you were a crabby baby in diapers?I was definitely a crabby baby in diapers but neither of my parents were musical so I experimented with different instruments and genres until I felt at home. It's completely nerdy but I have to be honest and say I played video games growing up and the soundtracks to some of them have subtly influenced Owl City. Sigh. You're entitled to make fun of me now.
Scientific studies show that butterflies taste with their feet. How does this make you feel?Jealous. If I were a butterfly, I'd wear ice cream shoes… or maybe cookie boots… I really need to think this over since it's such a big deal.
Have you ever gone through a near-death experience?Yeah, one time Ashley Tisdale called me up and wanted to have a chat. I was so nervous I almost had a heart attack.
Your lyrics can be pretty abstract at times. Are they metaphorical or were they written with more of a "non-representational" approach?Most of them are metaphors for things I've gone through or situations I've dealt with, although some songs were written with more of an abstract approach. I'm an admirer of non-representational visual art so some of that influence finds its way into my music. Being a normal guy involved in average everyday scenarios, I find it really interesting to write about typical, mundane things in somewhat "idealist" ways. I'm a daydreamer and a total optimist and I suppose that fuels the way I write more than anything.
How come a lot of your Owl City songs mention the ocean in them?I have a fascination with the ocean and everything related to water. Sailboats, dolphins, piers, islands, sea towns, scuba diving, beaches, inlets, harbors; they all seem so enchanting to me.
Are you from Seattle?No. I've never been there although it certainly looks wonderful and I'd love to visit. I'm a Minnesota boy.
What do you do when an endangered animal eats an endangered plant?Smile.
Why do they lock gas station bathrooms? Are they afraid someone will clean them?No, they're afraid George Michael will try to sneak in.
Should vegetarians eat animal crackers?No, and neither should anyone else except grouchy babies.
Is there something you are looking forward to?Putting on my Buzz Lightyear pajamas tonight and jumping on my bed to infinity and beyond!
Are you currently signed to a record label?No.
Do you really write and record all your music in your bedroom?Yes. I'm the farthest thing from a pro but I have fun and that's far more important to me. I just like making songs. Writing music is like tasting the sky. It keeps me dreaming in color.
Do you use drum loops?No. I make all my drum tracks from scratch and I sample quite a bit of sounds from field recordings I've made as well. Something about creating rhythm from natural sound is fascinating to me because it embodies such a unique mood. It puts a bit more "art" into the music in my opinion.
What should you be doing right now?Sitting on a beach, holding hands with a girly.
Why isn't there "mouse-flavored" cat food?Because people buy cat food, not cats.
Where do park rangers in Owl City go to "get away from it all?"The beach, like the rest of us.
Are you ticklish?For an owl, yes.
I'll bet you're missing someone right now.Always.
Is there anyone you care more about than yourself?Very much so.
What's your favorite part of the day?When I take a shower in the morning… I'm so hot, the water runs up instead of down. (Laughter) I'm totally kidding.
How old were you when you had your first crush?When the girl sitting next to me in 1st grade announced that we'd be married someday. I haven't seen her in 10 years so if you know where my future wife is, you should definitely let me know.
Why do kamikaze pilots wear helmets?Because that's what their goggles are attached to and they need their goggles to fly.
Do owls in Owl City prefer Coke or Pepsi?Neither. Vanilla Coke.
Do you know someone who once got SUPER mad and punched a huge dent in the door of his fridge?Yes.
Did he break his hand and have to wear a cast for six weeks?You know it.
That's pretty much the most amazing thing you've ever heard, am I right?Pretty much.
When can we expect new music?Soon! I'm working on a new album at the moment which I'm very excited about. A release date has not been set yet but the new record should be available within the year. I'll keep everyone posted as things move along and become finalized.
Say something incredibly witty and interesting.I love you.
