This transcript has been typed at speed, and therefore may contain mistakes. Newsnight accepts no responsibility for these. However, we will be happy to correct serious errors. JEREMY PAXMAN: Prime Minister, there aren't enough doctors or nurses. There aren't enough teachers. There are more cars on the road than when you came to power. The train service doesn't work. Violent crime is rising. Is that what you meant by the new Britain? 
 TONY BLAIR: No. We accept there are all sorts of things we still have to do - to take each one of those things in turn. There are more doctors than when we came to power. There are about 17,000 more nurses. Crime is down 10%, burglary down 25%. I would say, we don't say we've done everything. We've made a start, we've laid foundations. 
PAXMAN: You said "over the five years of a Labour Government, we will rebuild the NHS." 
BLAIR: We made a specific pledge on waiting lists. And we said we'd start to put right the rebuilding of a National Health Service where it depended on need. And as a result we've actually got some 17,000 more nurses and more doctors. 
PAXMAN: But you said "over the five years of a Labour Government we will rebuild the NHS." Did you underestimate the task? 
BLAIR: I don't think we underestimated the task. 
PAXMAN: Why say you could do it in five years? 
BLAIR: We didn't. 
PAXMAN: You said you would rebuild the NHS in five years. 
BLAIR: We made it clear we couldn't do everything in the first term. 
PAXMAN: Why did you say it? 
BLAIR: If you look at the full text, we made it clear... 
PAXMAN: It's in the manifesto. 
BLAIR: It is in the manifesto. We made a specific pledge, to get the waiting lists down by 100,000. We have achieved that pledge, but it is plain that we have to... It is plain that it was never going to be done overnight. Of course it will take time. 
PAXMAN: It was a mistake to say it then? 
BLAIR: No. We do have to rebuild the National Health Service. We are doing it. 
PAXMAN: You said "we WILL" rebuild the NHS in five years. 
BLAIR: What we said was that we will rebuild the National Health Service. And that is precisely what we are doing. 
PAXMAN: Over the five years of a Labour Government. It says so. 
BLAIR: We made it absolutely clear to people. The pledge we gave on health was a pledge that we would reduce waiting lists by 100,000. By no stretch of the imagination could you say that is every problem the National Health Service dealt with. We never pledged incidentally in the last manifesto a single extra nurse, but we have provided 17,000 more. 
PAXMAN: But you did pledge to... 
BLAIR: We didn't commit ourselves to providing any extra doctors or consultants but we have. 
PAXMAN: But you did pledge to rebuild the NHS in five years. You accept that hasn't happened. You've made a start on it. 
BLAIR: We certainly made a start on it. Incidentally, before you leave that, I made it absolutely clear throughout that we could not accomplish it all in one term. 
PAXMAN: Are you still committed to reaching the European average on health spending by 2003/2004? 
BLAIR: No, I didn't say we were committed to that. 
BLAIR: You did say... 
PAXMAN: I said that by the end of the second Comprehensive Spending Review, I wanted to reach the European average. 
PAXMAN: When is that? 
BLAIR: The first Comprehensive Spending Review comes to an end 2003/4 and then you have the next three-year period after that. 
PAXMAN: We are talking about 2006/2007? 
BLAIR: Yes. I made it clear again - because this refers to an interview on the Frost programme - we could only do that provided the economy remains strong. 
PAXMAN: That would be the intention - to reach the European average at that date, not the European average at the time you made the promise? 
BLAIR: Exactly. 
PAXMAN: It's a promise firmly... 
BLAIR: Assuming the strength of the economy. I can't write the Comprehensive Spending Review now. 
PAXMAN: So it's just an aspiration? 
BLAIR: It's what I said at the time. You probably have the words... 
PAXMAN: Yes. .. 
BLAIR: ..Of what I said, you will see that I said that, provided the economy remains strong, then we should be able to reach the European average. And incidentally, if we do that, we will only be able to achieve the changes we want to the health service if we accompany it by far-reaching reform. Money is not all it needs. 
PAXMAN: But it is a firm commitment that by 2006/7, if the European average is 8% or 9%, it will be that in this country unless we have had economic collapse?
