Note: Before you read this vile and insulting interview by Bill O'Reilly, let me say I watched this interview two times, this was the single most outrageous interview I have ever seen on any TV news show, anywhere by anyone. This man lost his Father in the 9-11 terrorist attacks and O'Reilly treated him like dirt. He tried to discredit and marginalize everything Mr. Glick said and showed him no respect at all just because he disagreed with O'Reilly. To say it was the most un-professional interview ever done by a so-called journalist is an under-statement. 
Try to remember if you ever saw a real journalist, anywhere in your life, tell an invited guest to shut up, shut up, and you just shut your mouth. Then tell the audio man to cut off his mic, what happened to free speech o'reilly. After all, these are the same free speech rights O'Reilly just defended the night before in regards to the boycott of Rush Limbaugh's sponsors. I guess in the biased, one-sided, conservative, all-spin zone world of Bill O'Reilly it seems you only have free speech rights when you agree with Bill and his conservative political views. I'm serious, they should take pictures of this interview and put it in all of the best photo books for the world to see, it's that insanely shocking. 
The next night on the factor (2-5-03) o'reilly read an e-mail about the Glick interview telling him he should be taken off the air for his treatment of Mr. Glick. The reply to that by o'reilly was "when someone comes into your house and spits on the floor they get no respect and you show them the door." That is a direct quote from Bill O'Reilly. So what Bill is saying is that if you come on the factor and you don't agree with him you do not have free speech rights and you are an un-american commie who gets no respect from him. 
If anyone doubts any of this, go buy the transcripts at foxnews.com and read them for yourself, or just watch the factor and see how he treats people who agree with him compared to people that do not agree with him. 
O'REILLY: In the "Personal Stories" segment tonight, we were surprised to find out than an American who lost his father in the World Trade Center attack had signed an anti-war advertisement that accused the USA itself of terrorism. The offending passage read, "We too watched with shock the horrific events of September 11... we too mourned the thousands of innocent dead and shook our heads at the terrible scenes of carnage -- even as we recalled similar scenes in Baghdad, Panama City, and a generation ago, Vietnam." With us now is Jeremy Glick, whose father, Barry, was a Port Authority worker at the Trade Center. Mr. Glick is a co-author of the book "Another World is Possible." I'm surprised you signed this. You were the only one of all of the families who signed... 
JEREMY GLICK: Well, actually, that's not true. 
O'REILLY: Who signed the advertisement? 
GLICK: Peaceful Tomorrow, which represents 9/11 families, were also involved. 
O'REILLY: Hold it, hold it, hold it, Jeremy. You're the only one who signed this advertisement. 
GLICK: As an individual. 
O'REILLY: Yes, as -- with your name. You were the only one. I was surprised, and the reason I was surprised is that this ad equates the United States with the terrorists. And I was offended by that. 
GLICK: Well, you say -- I remember earlier you said it was a moral equivalency, and it's actually a material equivalency. And just to back up for a second about your surprise, I'm actually shocked that you're surprised. If you think about it, our current president, who I feel and many feel is in this position illegitimately by neglecting the voices of Afro- Americans in the Florida coup, which, actually, somebody got impeached for during the Reconstruction period -- Our current president now inherited a legacy from his father and inherited a political legacy that's responsible for training militarily, economically, and situating geopolitically the parties involved in the alleged assassination and the murder of my father and countless of thousands of others. So I don't see why it's surprising... 
O'REILLY: All right. Now let me stop you here. So... 
GLICK: ... for you to think that I would come back and want to support... 
O'REILLY: It is surprising, and I'll tell you why. I'll tell you why it's surprising. 
GLICK: ... escalating... 
O'REILLY: You are mouthing a far left position that is a marginal position in this society, which you're entitled to. 
GLICK: It's marginal -- right. 
O'REILLY: You're entitled to it, all right, but you're -- you see, even -- I'm sure your beliefs are sincere, but what upsets me is I don't think your father would be approving of this. 
GLICK: Well, actually, my father thought that Bush's presidency was illegitimate. 
O'REILLY: Maybe he did, but... 
GLICK: I also didn't think that Bush... 
O'REILLY: ... I don't think he'd be equating this country as a terrorist nation as you are. 
GLICK: Well, I wasn't saying that it was necessarily like that. 
O'REILLY: Yes, you are. You signed... 
GLICK: What I'm saying is... 
O'REILLY: ... this, and that absolutely said that. 
GLICK: ... is that in -- six months before the Soviet invasion in Afghanistan, starting in the Carter administration and continuing and escalating while Bush's father was head of the CIA, we recruited a hundred thousand radical mujahadeens to combat a democratic government in Afghanistan, the Turaki government. 
O'REILLY: All right. I don't want to... 
GLICK: Maybe... 
O'REILLY: I don't want to debate world politics with you. 
GLICK: Well, why not? This is about world politics. 
O'REILLY: Because, No. 1, I don't really care what you think. 
GLICK: Well, OK. 
O'REILLY: You're -- I want to... 
GLICK: But you do care because you... 
O'REILLY: No, no. Look... 
GLICK: The reason why you care is because you evoke 9/11... 
O'REILLY: Here's why I care. 
GLICK: ... to rationalize... 
O'REILLY: Here's why I care... 
GLICK: Let me finish. You evoke 9/11 to rationalize everything from domestic plunder to imperialistic aggression worldwide. 
O'REILLY: OK. That's a bunch... 
GLICK: You evoke sympathy with the 9/11 families. 
O'REILLY: That's a bunch of crap. I've done more for the 9/11 families by their own admission -- I've done more for them than you will ever hope to do. 
GLICK: OK. 
O'REILLY: So you keep your mouth shut when you sit here exploiting those people. 
GLICK: Well, you're not representing me. You're not representing me. 
O'REILLY: And I'd never represent you. You know why? 
GLICK: Why? 
O'REILLY: Because you have a warped view of this world and a warped view of this country. 
GLICK: Well, explain that. Let me give you an example of a parallel... 
O'REILLY: No, I'm not going to debate this with you, all right. 
GLICK: Well, let me give you an example of parallel experience. On September 14... 
O'REILLY: No, no. Here's -- here's the... 
GLICK: On September 14... 
O'REILLY: Here's the record. 
GLICK: OK. 
O'REILLY: All right. You didn't support the action against Afghanistan to remove the Taliban. You were against it, OK. 
GLICK: Why would I want to brutalize and further punish the people in Afghanistan... 
O'REILLY: Who killed your father! 
GLICK: The people in Afghanistan... 
O'REILLY: Who killed your father. 
GLICK: ... didn't kill my father. 
O'REILLY: Sure they did. The al Qaeda people were trained there. 
GLICK: The al Qaeda people? What about the Afghan people? 
O'REILLY: See, I'm more angry about it than you are! 
GLICK: So what about George Bush? 
O'REILLY: What about George Bush? He had nothing to do with it. 
GLICK: The director -- senior as director of the CIA. 
O'REILLY: He had nothing to do with it. 
GLICK: So the people that trained a hundred thousand Mujahadeen who were... 
O'REILLY: Man, I hope your mom isn't watching this. 
GLICK: Well, I hope she is. 
O'REILLY: I hope your mother is not watching this because you -- that's it. I'm not going to say anymore. 
GLICK: OK. 
O'REILLY: In respect for your father... 
GLICK: On September 14, do you want to know what I'm doing? 
O'REILLY: Shut up. Shut up. 
GLICK: Oh, please don't tell me to shut up. 
O'REILLY: As respect -- as respect -- in respect for your father, who was a Port Authority worker, a fine American, who got killed unnecessarily by barbarians... 
GLICK: By radical extremists who were trained by this government... 
O'REILLY: Out of respect for him... 
GLICK: ... not the people of America. 
O'REILLY: ... I'm not going to... 
GLICK: ... The people of the ruling class, the small minority. 
O'REILLY: Cut his mic. I'm not going to dress you down anymore, out of respect for your father. We will be back in a moment with more of THE FACTOR. 
GLICK: That means we're done? 
O'REILLY: We're done. 
What you can not see here because it's a text transcript, is right after O'Reilly said "we're done" he made two motions with his hand. He (O'Reilly) waved at someone off camera as to say come here and get him (referring to Jeremy Glick) then he did a move with his thumb, he held his right thumb up and raised it up in a short little motion. It's as if he were hitch-hiking, like get him outta here. I am guessing he was telling someone on his staff or his bodyguard to throw Glick out of the studio. 
OREILLY: "I have to apologize. If I knew that guy, Jeremy Glick, was going to be like that, I never would have brought him in here, and I feel bad for his family. I really do. " 
The truly sad part is that if Mr. Glick were pro-bush and pro-war, and agreed with o'reilly, he would have been allowed to say whatever he wanted to, in the so-called no spin zone, and he would have been treated with total respect. Since he did not hold those positions he was told to shut up and shut your mouth and cut his mic off. I guess it's only a no-spin zone when you agree with o'reilly or his views. 
This is from the same guy (O'Reilly) who just the night before accused a man from takebackthemedia.com of trying to violate Rush Limbaugh's free speech rights by calling for everyone to boycott his sponsors. Which "as an american" he has the right to do, boycotts are a tradition and a right in america.Yet when Mr. Glick tried to state his views and opinions on the factor, Mr. "free speech" Bill O'Reilly told him to shut up, shut up, you just shut your mouth. So much for free speech on the factor. 
Speaking of boycotts, o'reilly called for a boycott of pepsi in august of 2002 because they hired the rapper Ludacris to do a commercial, this is all well documented. 
August 27, 2002 - http://www.boycottwatch.org - Fox News Channel commentator and host of The O'Reilly Factor urges people to boycott Pepsi after decided to run commercials featuring rapper Ludacris. The boycott is based on Pepsi hiring a spokesman who is "peddling antisocial behavior" according to O'Reilly. 
OREILLY: "I'm calling for all responsible Americans to fight back and punish Pepsi for using a man who degrades women, who encourages substance abuse, and does all the things that hurt particularly the poor in our society," I'm calling for all americans to say, hey, pepsi, i'm not drinking your stuff. You want to hang around with Ludacris, you do that, I'm not hanging around with you. Am I wrong to do that? 
Call me crazy but that looks like calling for a pepsi boycott to me. 
OREILLY: "So here's the deal, Pepsi. You want to cultivate
Ludacris? Fine. I'm drinking Coke. I'm sending you a message. I don't like your choice of pitchmen, so Dr. Pepper is now on my menu." 
 As a result, with their reputation tarnished, Pepsi announced they would not air the ads.
UPDATE August 28, 2002 - http://www.boycottwatch.org - Pepsi canceled plans to feature rapper Ludacris as spokesperson after Fox News commentator Bill O'Reilly declares a boycott. - Boycott worked in less than 24 hours. 
According to The O'Reilly Factor, Pepsi was inundated with thousands of phone calls from irate Factor viewers regarding the Ludacris ads. As a result, Pepsi announced they would not air the ads. 
The decision to pull the ads came a day after Bill O'Reilly, host of Fox News Channel's "The O'Reilly Factor," bashed Pepsi as "immoral" for using Ludacris to promote the soft drink and urged viewers to boycott Pepsi. 
That looks like a boycott to me. 
Then after all that o'reilly told Mr. Stinson from takebackthemedia.com it was unamerican to call for a boycott of Rush Limbaugh's sponsors. It seems that boycotts are ok in o'reilly's world as long as you don't call for one against a conservative. Then in reply to an e-mail sent to the factor (2-4-03) accusing him of being a hypocrite on the two different boycotts o'reilly denied he called for a boycott of pepsi. He (O'Reilly) claimed it was not a boycott because he did not actually say the word "boycott." I don't know about you, but to me this sounds like an argument a 5 year old would make, not a harvard graduate with a masters degree. If you doubt any of this just do a google search on o'reilly and pepsi boycotts. 
Lise Rousseau, Lafayette, Colorado, "Mr. O'Reilly, imagine my confusion as I watched you criticize the protester for organizing the Limbaugh boycott. Last August, I heard you tacitly call for a boycott against Pepsi for hiring Ludacris. There is a lack of consistency in your rhetoric." 
OREILLY: No, there isn't, Ms. Rousseau. First of all -- Ms. Rousseau. First of all, I never do anything tacitly. I do things directly. I simply said I wasn't going to drink Pepsi while that guy was on their payroll. No boycott was ever mentioned by me. 
Bill just lied his ass off folks. His own news network (FOX) even has a story where it reports o'reilly called for a boycott of pepsi. And as you can see above, the boycott of pepsi by Bill O'Reilly is well documented. 
Pepsi-Cola of North America said Wednesday that it was yanking its 30-second television spot featuring rapper Ludacris off the air -- just a day after Bill O'Reilly, Fox News Channel's host of The O'Reilly Factor, assailed Pepsi as "immoral" for using the controversial rapper and urged his viewers to boycott the beverage company. 
Is he saying his own news network is lying about the pepsi boycott too ? 
In the world of Bill O'Reilly and FOX news, you are only allowed to have free speech if you agree with them. This is called fascism, it's a sad day in america when a conservative fasicst (O'Reilly) on a conservative fasicst fraud of a news network can get away with violating a persons free speech rights. He defends Rush Limbaugh's (Republican) free speech rights one night then violates Jeremy Glicks (Democrat) free speech rights the very next night. 
Then he has the nerve to claim he is an independent, not a conservative. If you believe that e-mail me at sss_2333@yahoo.com because I have a bridge to sell you real cheap. He also told Newt Gingrich he was an objective analyst, after you pick yourself up off the floor from laughter remember he was serious.
