This article originally appeared in the Toronto Star on Nov. 22, 2002.
 About this transcript: What follows is a complete transcript of the Star's interview with Chief of Police Julian Fantino on Oct. 18 (2002) in the seventh-floor boardroom of Toronto Police headquarters. The meeting was scheduled to begin at 9: 30 a.m. but started 10 minutes late at 9:40 a.m. Fantino terminated the interview at approximately 10 a.m., although it was scheduled to last until 10:30.
 Seated around the conference table were Fantino, police counsel Jerry Wiley, Deputy Chief of Police Mike Boyd, Superintendent Wayne Cotgreave, who is Fantino's executive officer, Superintendent of community policing Keith Forde, Staff Inspector Peter Sloly, of corporate communications, Star police issues reporter Jennifer Quinn and crime reporter Michelle Shephard.
 At the start of the interview, everyone was handed a four-page outline of the Star's findings.
 Portions in bold type below are statements made by Fantino that were printed in the Star Oct. 19.
 Fantino: I can't spend all day at this, we're going to have to talk about some of these issues and some issues I'll address and others I can't.
 Star: That's something that Peter had made clear that in terms of the numbers, that's something that you didn't want to go back and forth on. The numbers are there for you to look at but if you don't want to address them specifically I think it's very important to talk about the issues in general to see what we can discuss. We only have 50 minutes left.
 Cotgreave: This is all so very unfair. Like you take all summer, two years to manipulate our numbers and we don't even know if they're accurate or not and now you give us 30 seconds to read them and the chief of police . . .
 Star: We actually requested the interview almost two weeks ago so there has been time, but anyway I don't think we should not waste our time now discussing . . .
 Fantino: Well, we didn't have this (holding up data summary). You could have provided this to us. We could have done some homework.
 Star: It's our understanding that you're not able to run the numbers the way we've been able to because of the ban on the numbers anyway ...
 Fantino: Why don't we get into the nuts and bolts and we'll take it from there.
 Star: Sure, do you want to just react generally to what you've read there and what we've come forth with. . .
 Fantino: Well I'm very disappointed that the Star in essence has done the very thing that we're not allowed to do, nor have we done, nor are we doing and that is to classify the ethnicity, the race of people in the fashion that you've done. So right off the bat we're at a very significant disadvantage. I'm very disappointed that the Star has done this and no doubt will cause a whole lot of perceptions and spin-off rhetoric that is clearly unnecessary at a time when I feel that the relationship with all of our communities is a good one and we're working well towards finding solutions to very serious problems.
 Star: Yes.
 Fantino: But anyway that's . . .
 Star: Well, no but that's where we can start because from interviewing various community leaders many have said that it's been probably the best relations that they have had, since you've come in. So let's start there and see what kind of measures you ...
 Fantino: But it seems that according to some people no matter what honest efforts people make there's always those who are intent on causing trouble, which obviously this is going to do exactly that.
 Star: Well, chief, wouldn't you agree that taking a look at the way that people are treated systematically is a good exercise?
 Fantino: No, it isn't a good exercise because you don't have all the facts, you've been very selective. We arrest upward of 50,000 people a year at this police service, from many different races, many different backgrounds and you've taken a slice of the community and you've focused on that and you've targeted that. Where's the other numbers of citizens, from, you've orchestrated an end result here and you're working towards it and I'm going to have to disappoint you that we don't do profiling at this police service, we never have and we will not do it. We deal with the activity and we deal with the circumstances as they're presented to us very often reported to us, responding to calls from the community and that's where we focus our energy on and if you find that that leads you to conclude certain inappropriate conduct on our part, I, I vehemently deny that.
 Star: If you, one of the things we found though, is whether or not it's conscious or unconscious, that there are variances in the way that people are treated after an arrest.
 Fantino: Well, you're assuming in the study that you've done that we ask everybody their credentials before we arrest them or before we engage. We respond to activities, we don't know at the front end of anything who we're dealing with. A lot of the information that you've gathered is post the initial response from the police to an activity, a situation or any kind of a call for assistance. You don't know the origin of these arrests. You don't know the circumstances, the social economic circumstances of people involved. You don't know the other factors that play into why people have encounters with the police, so you're just throwing out numbers and you've come to certain conclusions which is your right to do but I think it's all done in a vacuum and devoid of context.
 Star: Let's go back to social economic circumstances. That's something that you said. How does that effect what interaction you have with . . .
 Fantino: Well, we have certain communities, for instance, that are communities that are under great stress and great distress. The ratio of population in certain areas, the type of environmental conditions that exist, the high concentration of public housing in certain areas, all of that is, are factors beyond our control that clearly in certain areas, circumstances require police response both in the area of dealing with crime and victimization and also of dealing with so many of the programs that our people are involved in, dealing with prevention, working with young people, working with communities to solve problems. They're different, they're different throughout the city. This city is really, it's very difficult to take a snapshot and say this is the generic view of the city of Toronto, it isn't.
 Star: Taking in one of our findings and what we've looked at because we understand that there is a lot of discretion, what we looked at was the crime of simple drug possession and we looked at the various different types of drug possession, be it marijuana, cocaine. We brought the sample down to only those who have race identified. From there, we further brought the sample down to things like no address listed, unemployment. We got a very, a solid sample that we actually brought an independent consultant in to confirm that it would be an accurate comparison. In that, we found that there was difference in how black suspects were treated as opposed to white suspects . . .
 Fantino: We . . .
 Star: In the way that they were released from . . .
 Fantino: We deal with the events for what they are . . .
 Cotgreave: Wait a second here. We don't even know if you're accurate. You never called us with those . . .
 Sloly: Those statistics are at this point, because of the nature of disclosure, we're not even going to discuss them. I think the chief can speak to the issues of how this police service conducts itself ...
 Fantino: We don't treat people differently. I mean your statistics, however you analyzed them, your statistician didn't come and analyze the, how many did you analyze . . .
 Star: In total, the database has . . .
 Star: Over 400,000.
 Fantino: We arrested 400,000 names?
 Star: No, it depends on each. Yeah it depends on each that we looked at ...
 Fantino: You don't have names.
 Star: We did not get names.
 Star: No, no.
 Fantino: What did you get?
 Star: Well, this is what went back and forth for two years between the privacy com . . .
 Cotgreave: Oh come on.
 Star: Privacy was a main concern and obviously we didn't want names or addresses. So we had to group it in such a way that ...
 Cotgreave: Hold on.
 Star: It's statistically sound database in terms of the numbers . . .
 Star: Instead of a name there would be an arrest number and that's . . .
 Cotgreave: I don't. How do we know about . . .
 Fantino: Hold on. Just hang on a sec. So you looked at 400,000.
 Star: The total is ... Okay, let's look at the example on your sheet of number 3.
 Cotgreave: This is . . . (talking with Sloly, inaudible)
 Fantino: Hold on, I just want to hear this. You have 400,000 names? Or 400,000 issues.
 Star: Over 400,000, I think it was ...
 Fantino: Cases?
 Star: 488,000 arrest numbers.
 Fantino: Four hundred . . . in what period of time?
 Fantino: Okay, so that's . . .
 Star: There are actually more than 10,000 people in the database (pointing to one of figures on four-page summary) ... But to look at various areas, we had to keep coming down ...
 Fantino: But what I don't understand is that you're saying you looked at 488,000 arrested persons? Is that what you're saying? 488,000 arrested persons, is that what you're saying?
 Star: We're looking at your complete arrest database from '96 to 2002.
 Fantino: But what does that mean, that you looked at, how many?
 Star: Your Criminal Information Processing System.
 Fantino: Four hundred . . .
 Star: Instead of having names, because of privacy concerns, those names and addresses are taken out. But the arrest number is still there.
 Sloly: Part of the problem here is that you don't have a clear understanding of how our database is set up and in fairness to the chief this database was created before his arrival. It's a very complicated system and none of the people here at this table have the technical competence to debate where you're going. I think you wanted some ideas about the chief, from the chief, on these issues relating to . . .
 Star: Right, exactly. But you're bringing up the numbers and in fact what I had said . . .
 Star: : No, you just asked how many are in here . . .
 Cotgreave: No, come on.
 Star: In fact what I had said when we spoke was that Jennifer and I were reporters in this and we were not the ones who analyzed the numbers. I'd be happy to have someone come in to do that and you said, 'No, we're not talking about numbers, I don't want that.' So let's get away from that issue. I agree . . .
 Cotgreave: I'm sorry. What you said is you've had a statistical expert who said these statistics are sound and he doesn't know anything about our database.
 Fantino: Can I make an observation please?
 Cotgreave: It's that ...
 Fantino: Can I make an observation please, people please.
 Star: Yes.
 Fantino: You're talking about a six-year period, 1996 to 2002.
 Star: Yes.
 Fantino: The most we ever arrested at the Toronto police service is 50,000 people of all categories. You here are claiming you have looked at arrestees of 574,980, of 794,968 total charges. It doesn't compute, people. I'm sorry, my math . . .
 Star: The information we have in the database is from you. So if there's any . . .
 Fantino: It's the way you've interpreted it. You have assumed incorrectly, wrongly, that that number corresponds to number of arrestees, which your document states. It's impossible, we never have arrested that many people . . .
 Star: Chief, when I asked Peter if we could bring in one of our experts, he said no. So you're saying you don't have the expertise. Jennifer and I don't feel we have the database expertise. But we're confident and what I can say is . . .
 Fantino: Let me go on the record then.
 Star: This is the . . .
 Fantino: No. Okay, let me go on the record and tell you that the data you are providing, the data that you have interpreted, totally inappropriately and incorrectly because it doesn't reflect the reality of what we're dealing with here. As far as the way you've interpreted it here, taking into account all those charges where birth country is specified for the arrestee, 574,000 etc...It doesn't make any sense
 Star: Okay, we'll put you ...
 Fantino: Why don't we stay off the numbers.
 Star: What I was going to say is we'll quote you as saying that. But obviously we have, we would not be going with the story if we didn't feel it was sound data.
 Fantino: Well, you go with whatever you want.
 Star: And that's fine. So let's get to the issues. The other issue we looked at ...
 Fantino: Okay, don't ignore the issue that your data is your data and your interpretation is your interpretation.
 Star: It's your data and it's our interpretation. And that's the way we've written it.
 Cotgreave: No it's ...
 Fantino: Well.
 Star: It's your data.
 Fantino: All right.
 Star: Our data was provided by the Toronto police ...
 Fantino: I'm sorry, but ...
 Star: The interpretation is the Toronto Star's and that's how we've written it.
 Fantino: Okay, fair enough.
 Star: So, because we're getting down to half an hour now of time left, do you want to comment on the issue that we have that we feel we have found that black suspects charged with simple drug possession are treated more harshly than white suspects and that's what the story's going to say. Would you like to comment on that?
 Fantino: I deny that absolutely. We deal with the circumstances that we're presented with and we make judgments on the basis of what we do within the system, holistically across the scale. We don't look at, nor do we consider the race or ethnicity or any of that as factors of how we dispose of cases or individuals or how we treat individuals.
 Star: Our second finding was that we found in non-moving, what we've classified as non-moving offences, meaning offences that could only come to light and tickets that could only be given under the Highway Traffic Act, after someone has been stopped. So we're not talking about speeding. We're not talking about broken tail lights. We're talking about offences that the officer has found after someone's been stopped, change of licence, driving under suspension, those kinds of factors. We found in those cases that black people are issued, black motorists are issued those tickets far more often than white ...
 Fantino: Where is that recorded?
 Cotgreave: We don't record that.
 Fantino: Where's that recorded?
 Sloly: Again that's a CIPS misinterpretation of the database, the ...
 Fantino: We don't even keep that data . . .
 Star: We found that you have. Let's talk about the issue generally and in the United States which has been a ...
 Fantino: I don't want to talk about the United States.
 Star: Okay, that's fine, I was just leading into the question ...
 Fantino: I'm not talking about the ...
 Star: There has been the phenomenon that's been colloquially termed 'driving while black.' That's something a lot of the police forces down there have dealt with and that's an issue we're bringing up ...
 Fantino: You know you have come to this issue with a pre-determined outcome and you're engaging in an exercise of the ends justify the means. I'm only responding to issues that are pertinent to the Toronto Police Service. We do not do racial profiling. We do not deal with people on the basis of their ethnicity, their race or any other factor. We deal with people in situations for what it is that we're mandated to do. We're not perfect people, but you're barking up the wrong tree. There's no racism. There's no activity that constitutes your analysis of what it is you're trying to interpret here. It just doesn't happen.
 Star: Chief, with all due respect, how do you know that?
 Fantino: I know that because you've already alluded to the fact that we're supposed to be picking on certain minorities, certain racial members of our community on the basis of traffic tickets. Nowhere in those tickets anywhere are the race or background of a person recorded other than address, date of birth, driver's licence, motor vehicle registration, etc. You're wrong.
 Star: You say unequivocally though that racial profiling does not happen on the Toronto police force.
 Fantino: That's correct.
 Star: How do you have data to back that up?
 Fantino: Why should I keep data? How do you, for instance, put a question like that and expect me to keep data on something that we're not allowed to do? We don't keep data. We're not supposed to. We have policy that does not allow us to do that. We don't do it.
 Wiley: You want us to do racial profiling to prove that we don't do racial profiling?
 Fantino: You do racial profiling.
 Wiley: Is that what you want?
 Star: No, we're just. The question ...
 Wiley: No, is that what you want? That's what you're suggesting to the chief.
 Star: What I'm suggesting. . .
 Wiley: Do racial profiling to prove that he doesn't do racial profiling.
 Star: In 2001, there was a report that went to the Toronto police services board from the race relations committee that was accepted, that said perhaps it's a good idea that we start keeping data on traffic stops like they do in the United States. I'm just wondering something along those lines. Is that not something ... that was a report that was taken and considered.
 Fantino: We go back to the fact that we at this police service do not keep race statistics. And I would expect that all of those people who so vehemently took the position that the police ought never to do this, I would expect that they'll come out and be quite incensed about what you're doing. I would hope that they will.
 Star: There's no debate. There's no question that there's a great debate about whether or not to keep...
 Fantino: Well, we're not doing it.
 Star: I understand.
 Fantino: And until such time as I'm directed to do otherwise, we're not doing it.
 Star: Well, do you want to talk about the history of that? Obviously, this is something that you faced 12 years ago.
 Fantino: Oh, please. You know, don't, don't, don't discredit what you're trying to do by trying to personalize the issue. I'm not even going to dignify that.
 Star: We're not trying to personalize the issue.
 Fantino: Please.
 Star: To talk about where we are now and ...
 Fantino: Please, Michelle. Please. I knew that you'd go there and it just shows how low and how, how, how cynical this whole exercise is. That you would dare to bring that up? Shame on you.
 Star: I think the question, sir ...
 Fantino: Shame on you.
 Star: Was posed in the vein of ...
 Fantino: Why don't you ask me about all the good things that I've done?
 Star: We did at the beginning of the interview, and I'd like to hear more about that.
 Fantino: Oh, please.
 Star: I think ...
 Fantino: You want to hear about my 33-year career in three police services and the things that I've done and the kinds of issues that I've had to deal with and still are, am? Why don't we talk about that? Why is it that you're so focused on this? That is as low as you could be on any one issue. You want to deal with this issue, you deal with it. Don't personalize me in this issue.
 Star: Sir, I think the question was posed in the fact that we're trying to understand...
 Fantino: This is trash.
 Star: We're trying . . .
 Fantino: It's trash.
 Star: Sir, I'm just going to finish the question and then you can respond however you feel is appropriate but ...
 Fantino: I'm disgusted.
 Star: Is there not a taboo when it comes ...
 Fantino: I don't even want to respond, I don't even want to touch it.
 Star: ...to keeping race statistics?
 Fantino: It's absolutely irresponsible that you would even hint ...
 Star: We're not trying to personalize it. What we're saying is that the ban happened in 1989 and after that point no longer could race statistics be gathered. Not your involvement in it...
 Fantino: I am so ...
 Star: But the history of the ban ...
 Fantino: I am so disappointed that you would go there. I am so disappointed.
 Star: Well, we'll quote you saying that.
 Fantino: Well, you can also say that you should feel ashamed that you would stoop so low to try to make something out of something that doesn't ... Oh, forget it. This is disgusting.
 Boyd: Perhaps you'd like to know about the training that we put in place ...
 Star: That would be great.
 Boyd: In 1991, '92.
 Star: We would like to talk about that.
 Fantino: I don't even think we want to talk about this anymore. This is the end of it. I'm just disgusted. This is an ambush. Have a nice day, people.
 Star: Okay. Thank you for your time.
 Fantino: Disgusted. You know, I could understand answering these issues here, but you had to... So what are you inferring, that I'm a racist?
 Star: Certainly not.
 Star: No.
 Fantino: Give yourselves a shake, people. I tell you it'll be a long time before you dignify my office.
 Star: Thank you for your time this morning.
