How much does it mean to you to be managing in the Premier League? "I already had a lot of opportunities. But at the time the priority was not like it is now. I am already 62, so my career is reaching the end, that is why I was in Spain, Germany and Netherlands. 
 "There is only one football country I wanted to see inside and that was England, because of the level and the atmosphere and that was why I announced in October, so that all of the English clubs knew. I had more offers than just Manchester United." 
 How did you let them know? 
 "In October I announced it. I said it 10 minutes before a press conference as coach of the Netherlands. They [the Dutch] were very angry that I did it. 
 "They said it was unbelievable that I could say that before the World Cup and I said that was bull**** because the pressure I put on myself is higher than the press ever can do." 
 So was it a dream opportunity when Manchester United came to you in April? 
 "I don't say it's a dream, because I am 62 and I know what I can do and I think Manchester United know what I can do and I think that is why they have come for me and they were not the only club. 
 "Tottenham Hotspur also came. I am not a child anymore, I know what I can do, but it's fantastic because not any coach can work with the biggest clubs." 
 What do you need to work with a club of United's size? What makes you a good fit for this club? 
 "I have experience because I worked in Spain with the No 1 club, in Germany with the No 1 club and also in the Netherlands, and I speak the language, which is important. 
 "It's now much easier than when I went to Spain, because I didn't speak the language, but within one year I spoke the language. 
 "I speak English my way, but people understand it. You can understand everything I say, and that's the most important thing. 
 "In Germany I spoke the language at once, and that is why I always choose countries where I can speak the language, because for me communication is very important. 
 "The third thing is my philosophy, and that philosophy I have shown in every job I have had. 
 "These are the three qualities that convinced Ed Woodward and the owners to take me. I don't know, though, you'll have to ask them." 
 Have you taken over at the best time? Expectations lower after seventh place last season? 
 "I don't think so, because when you have to make a club that normally plays from first position, and now you are seventh, then you know the selection is not in balance or broken, or that the confidence or something like that is wrong. 
 "I had to follow Bobby Robson at Barcelona. He had won three titles. That was easier for me than now I think. 
 "The same with the Dutch squad. It was very difficult to succeed Bert van Marwijk because two years before he was second in the World Cup and then he left a broken selection behind - so that was much more difficult than you think. 
 "I was already asked in the 90s by Manchester United [if I would join them] because Ferguson wanted to quit at that time and then maybe I could succeed [him]. That was more easy at that time I think." 
 Did you come close to managing United in the 1990s? Detailed conversations? 
 "No, no no. Only rumours that he might quit. 
 You say broken, which is a strong word. How much does it take to fix it? 
 "I don't think it is a hard word because I think when you are seventh the selection at that time, the team is not happy and unsatisfied and without confidence and, when you are like that, you are broken. 
 "So now they have me: a new manager so new chances for the players and they want to show themselves unbelievably much. 
 "It is nice that they want to do that, but we have to make a way of playing football that is not the same as before, and that is difficult for them. 
 "They have to perform under resistance [pressure]. They have to decide [what to do with the ball] within one second and that is not easy. 
 "But we have won two times and it makes it easier when you when than when you lose, whoever the opponent is. 
 "AS Roma was not a light opponent. You can say LA Galaxy is a light opponent. But AS Roma is not a light opponent and Inter Milan is not a light opponent. 
 When you were at Barcelona, you said you need an intelligent group who can adapt. Is there any concern that this group will not be able to adapt to your demands? 
 "Every club where I have been, I have struggled for the first three months. After that, they know what I want: how I am as a human being and also a manager, because I am very direct. 
 "I say things as they are, so you have to adapt to that way of coaching. 
 "It's not so easy. And also the way I train and coach is in the brains and not the legs. 
 "You have seen my exercises with all the tactical arguments and not without the tactical arguments. I am not for running [for its own sake] and I am for running with the ball, but they like that [laughs] of course. 
 "But the most important thing is they have to know why we do things and when they do, the football player is not playing intuitively. 
 "A lot of players are playing intuitively and I want them to think and know why they do something. 
 "That's a process that is difficult at first and in the first three months. It takes time. 
 "When we survive the first three months, it will be the same as for me at Bayern. 
 "In Bayern, after the first three months, we were sixth or seventh and we were third in the Champions League group. 
 "We had to win at Juventus and we won that game and that was the turning point. 
 The British footballer is characterised as a man who plays on emotion and doesn't play in the way you describe as much as the Dutch footballer would is that fair? 
 "That is your opinion. You say it, then you say I have to say it. 
 Is that an unfair statement? 
 "I don't know, because I have to know the players first then I can judge. You can judge because you have been a journalist for many years and have seen the culture. 
 From the outside, what are your views of a British player? 
 "What he has mentioned. 
 So you share a similair view? 
 "No, because I have already said the players under the direction of David Moyes is a lot of different to the players under the direction of Alex Ferguson, but also under the direction of me. 
 "But we shall have to wait and see. But from the outside it is fair to say that. 
 "But I don't want to be judging as an outsider. I want to hear that and feel that but at the moment they are doing great. 
 Is part of your challenge to build a squad at Manchester United to be successful for a few years not just one or two seasons? 
 "That is always my philosophy. I'm not a coach who thinks short term, I am a coach who thinks always in the long term. 
 "The way you see Barcelona still playing with six players from my time because I gave a lot of chances to the youth players but the structure and the culture of the club is Xavi, Iniesta, Puyol, Valdes and Motta, I also gave his debut and he is playing in Paris St.Germain, not a little club. 
 "At Bayern Munich it was the same. You can see that in Muller, Alaba, Klose, that kind of player. So I am always for the long term not the short term. 
 "When I buy, I buy players for the long term, not the short term because I do respect the club a lot and also the other clubs. 
 "When you see Ajax I had the youngest team to win the Champions League with 17, 18, 19 year-old players." 
 Is that your preference? Is it better to win with your own players rather than have to buy players? 
 "The argument for that is when you use youth players of the club they know the culture of the club and they want to defend that culture and wear that culture and transfer that culture. 
 "When you buy a player from outside you have to wait and see and not every player will fulfil your expectation, it is much more difficult, also for the player." 
 What do you think of the challenge of having such a big club like Manchester City in the same City, a team that has also won the title? 
 "It does not bother me, whether they are 10 metres away or 30 km away." 
 What do you think of what Manchester City have done over the last three years? 
 "It is amazing because they were not a big club and now are already champions and they have also won cups in the last three years. 
 "They are knocking at the door, but that is good for Manchester United also because where there is competition you can be proud when you are the champion at the end and maybe we will be the champions." 
 City fans would argue that they have knocked at the door and opened it and closed it and now you have to knock at the door again and try and get back through it? 
 "If you like to say that, then you have to write it down! I feel that you like to say that." 
 But that's their view – that they are on top? 
 "I have learnt the word entice. You are enticing me. I said provoke but Ryan said entice. But the players didn't understand and said 'provoke.'" 
 Are you looking forward to your managerial battle with Jose Mourinho? 
 "No. I play against Chelsea and not against Jose Mourinho. My team and his team are playing against each other." 
 But he is renowned for engaging in mind games with managers and players – will that provoke you? 
 "No. He shall not do that with me." 
 But he's already tried over Luke Shaw? 
 "No. I'm not reacting to that kind of stuff." 
 Sir Alex Ferguson's legacy is daunting for anybody, but because of your CV and experience are you undaunted by the scale of club? 
 "The club are thinking that I am the man who can wear this legacy, so..." 
 Not worried about being compared to Ferguson? 
 "That doesn't bother me. It is nice to be compared to such a class trainer. It's nice when you do that and when you give me a positive compliment then it is nice." 
 Have you met him yet? 
 "No, I'm here in America. And he is not." 
 Untied fans were very excited by the way you handled some of the Holland games in the World Cup, changes of formations, keeper for shoot-out etc? 
 "It is also a little bit lucky when you do that, but of course you do those things with arguments [good reasons]. 
 "Already I give this press conference with a lot of arguments [reasons] I hope you can understand that." 
 Journalist laughs ... 
 "You are laughing?" Journalist: "No, we had a manager before we had a lot of arguments with." 
 "Not arguments, the reasons why. So it is good that I explained that! I don't have arguments with you – until this moment. 
 "But we have transformed the Dutch school from 1-4-3-3 to 4-3-1-2 depending on the opponent. It can be 5-3-2 also. 
 "Against Roma (in Denver), they played with three strikers so I changed it to five defenders. 
 "But we pushed through. That kind of thing I have done with the Dutch. Transform it into a new system. 
 "But all the players here at Manchester United are used to playing 4-3-3, so I can change like I did with the Dutch team against Mexico to 4-3-3. 
 "I only have to change one position and we play 4-3-3, so it is dependent on the process of where we are. 
 "Until now, I am very satisified, but maybe tomorrow we lose to Inter Milan. They are playing the same system and, when you followed the World Cup the Dutch squad, most of the problems were when playing opponents who are playing the same system. 
 "Chile, we beat them 2-0 but in the last 10 minutes we beat them. We played against Mexico who played the same system and won 2-1 and Costa Rica 0-0. 
 "Three same systems and all three games were decided in the last 10 minutes. 
 "And now we play Inter Milan, so I'm very curious how the game goes tomorrow." 
 Press officer: 'Sorry guys we've got to go.' Van Gaal: "Interesting eh? Interesting. You're all coaches now." 
 - United manager Van Gaal lays down blueprint for 'broken' club - Van Gaal unfazed by City rivalry and Mourinho's mind games - What we learnt from Van Gaal, according to Mark Ogden - Dutchman says Levy wanted wanted him at Tottenham - Van Gaal planning for future by giving youth chance
