CURRY: You donated $5 million of your own money or you're pledging. You've got somebody else pledging another $5 million.
 Mr. PITT: Right.
 CURRY: And you're also asking the American people to step up and help.
 Mr. PITT: Right, right, that's ...
 CURRY: How can they help?
 Mr. PITT: That's what this is. I mean, this is really an adopt a house campaign. I'm asking for foundations, for high net worth individuals, for church groups, for corporations to come in and adopt a house. Basically, $150,000 will get a family back into their — back into their home, so ...
 CURRY: You actually think even, like, you know, Joe and Ma Smith or whatever at home with a dollar, if they go to a certain Web site ...
 Mr. PITT: It works on this level, too. If they come on the Web site you can — you can adopt a low flush toilet, a solar panel, these are all sustainable.
 CURRY: For Christmas.
 Mr. PITT: For Christmas, yeah.
 CURRY: Rather than that sweater you could've got?
 Mr. PITT: That's my hope. If you go on and do that and I'm going to get my dad a tankless water heater. I just spoiled the surprise. But that's the hope here is to call on the American people to come here in the holiday season and to come to our Web site and help the families of New Orleans get back into their homes.
 CURRY: And people who have no connection to New Orleans, why should they do this?
 Mr. PITT: Well, I mean, you know, listen, I'm not much of a salesman. I mean, I can't tell people. Either you're moved or you're not. But for me, I think of a father who once had a home here and raised my kid — raising my kids here. And if I lost everything and had no way to return, how that would make me feel. And then the fact that other Americans would come in and help me out and help me create a path for me to come back to my roots, to my home, would mean everything to me, would restore my faith in humanity. We talked about ...
 CURRY: You want to do that?
 Mr. PITT: We're going to do that. I mean, Mr. Greene over here, he's living in a trailer. He lost his granddaughter and he lost his mother the night, right here where we stand.
 CURRY: Hmm. I know.
 Mr. PITT: Jumping from roof to roof. You've got to understand this place where we are within 20 minutes was up to water levels up to 18 feet.
 CURRY: Right.
 Mr. PITT: People were forced to their roofs. The house off the foundations, having to jump to other roofs. And you know, it's a huge tragedy that left a big scar, and it's a big scar now because these people are in limbo.
 CURRY: You can do this because of the love of your fans, because you've got people who care about you and gives you power to bring attention to all of this. Your fans, a lot of them want to know, you know, how you have time to do this. I mean, here you are. You're an actor. You're a father of four kids all under the age 7. We see you as a play-on-the-ground, you know, hands-on kind of father.
 Mr. PITT: I don't know how to — I see this as a great opportunity. This is — I find this more fulfilling as any film I've been in.
 CURRY: So when you stack up your priorities, how do you prioritize in your multitasking life?
 Mr. PITT: Well, it's going to be family first, certainly. And — but that love of my family brings me here.
 CURRY: And does that — does doing this come before movies? You've got to prioritize when you multitask.
 Mr. PITT: Sure. I guess so. I can't — I don't see why I have to let anything go at this point. But right now, yeah, this is the focus and we're going to see this through.
 CURRY: And more than 150, so this could be a long-term project.
 Mr. PITT: Yeah. We should be down here for years. I mean, we'll go as long as we've got the support. So I really need— I'm really hoping that folks will come to the Web site ... www.makeitrightnola.org.
 CURRY: OK.
 Mr. PITT: And we'll check this out and see what we're doing here.
 CURRY: Brad Pitt, you know what? Multitasker.
 Mr. PITT: Great.
 CURRY: A man who likes pink. Full of surprises.
 Mr. PITT: I guess so. I guess so.
 CURRY: Thank you so much this morning.
 Mr. PITT: Thank you much. I appreciate it.
 CURRY: And we want to tell everybody that if you didn't get that Web site, you can find a link to it on our Web site which is at todayshow.com. Now back to you, Meredith.
 VIEIRA: Thank you, Ann. If I can ask you and Brad very quickly, the images of the houses, they look like they're on a stilt, they're raised houses. Is that because of concerns that there could be flooding again in the area?
 CURRY: Meredith is asking, in the images that we showed, it looks like the houses are on stilts. Is that because of concerns about flooding again?
 Mr. PITT: Yeah. Absolutely. I mean, there's no question. If you live in San Francisco, you're going to go through another earthquake. There will be flooding here again.
 CURRY: Mm-hmm.
 Mr. PITT: So the requirements for the architects were affordability, sustainability.
 CURRY: Safety.
 Mr. PITT: Safety, one of the key issues and that they be beautiful. So, yeah, there's definitely — these homes will be built to be — height restrictions, to keep people who are — if they have to weather out a storm, keep them safe. There's other safety precautions built into the buildings where you can even get higher and the safety kits worked in.
 CURRY: Nice.
 Mr. PITT: Yeah. But it's a big focus.
 CURRY: And Brad, actually, Meredith, had some of the biggest names in architecture all over the world involved in these drawings. And there are I think about 13 different types of homes that people can choose from.
 Mr. PITT: Yeah. Right now. And, again, we hope to bring in more architects and keep building on this catalog and make it available for everyone.
 CURRY: All right. Thank you, Brad Pitt.
 Mr. PITT: Yeah, yeah.
 VIEIRA: Thank you, Ann. Thank you, Brad. Truly beautiful homes.
