Harrison with William and Harry about the tribute to Diana.
Next year is the 10th anniversary of the loss of your mother. How are you planning to mark this?
commemorate and celebrate our mother's life, as it's been 10 years since she died, with a memorial service on 31 August in London. And a concert, a tribute concert, celebrating her life on 1 July on her birthday.
Harry, who will be attending the church service?
side and our father's side - everyone getting together. 
It should be a good occasion and lots of loud hymns, I Vow To Thee My Country, all the good ones. And, no, it should be a very sort of simple and nice service.
You're both very closely involved in the organisation of these events, both the church service and the concert. Tell us a bit about that.
William: Well we both wanted to put our stamp on it. We want it to represent
exactly what our mother would have wanted; how she was and all that sort of thing. So therefore the church service alone isn't enough. 
We wanted to have this big concert with, you know, full of energy, full of the sort of fun and happiness which I know she would have wanted. And on her birthday as well, it's got to be the best birthday present she ever had. 
By the two of us organising it, we wanted to have the fact that the evening is all about our mother.
The main purpose is to celebrate and to have fun and to remember her in a fun way.
It sounds like an amazing concert. Have you got some exciting artists already lined up?
thank everyone who's taken part and who's given up their time to come. 
And loads of people coming from, from far away and across the ocean and things like that. So really, really kind. But to name a few, because we don't want to name everyone because we want to keep a surprise. 
then we've got Pharrell Williams.
Harry: And Joss Stone. There's plenty, plenty more, don't worry.
William: That's a little flavour.
Harry: A little flavour.
William: But the idea is we wanted to get artists that our mother really loved, and then artists that both Harry and I enjoy, and in the middle with the ballet and Andrew Lloyd Webber - obviously she loved her dancing and her musicals. 
So with that you've got a sort of something different, it's not just any old concert. It's going to be different and it's going to be interesting. If it works it will be brilliant, if it doesn't then we won't be in the country!
Harry: You won't see us for a very long time.
And will we see you dancing?
William: I really hope not!
Harry I hope so! Him, not me. I hope that we can
get the chance to see him dance.
William: It'll be a terrifying sight if we do. But, yeah well, you know.
Harry: We'll be kicking around. We should be on stage at some point. Probably at the beginning of the night, not towards the end.
exciting prospect.
William: It is absolutely brilliant. We're really lucky that we've got the Wembley Stadium and the Arena. 
And along with a whole load of partners who are helping along, in the whole event, it should run really smoothly and they've given up so much of their time to help. 
And of course having Wembley itself is brilliant. And not that the President of the FA [William] had anything to do with it, but it's brilliant and it's the best place to have it next year, definitely.
the concert yet?
William: Yes, we've decided that it's going to be called Concert for Diana, because obviously the evening is going to be purely about her. 
We both want to make sure, first and foremost, the evening is for her. It's to remember her and to commemorate her life and celebrate it.
money for some charities as well?
William: Yes, we are. We're raising money for Centrepoint and Sentebale. I'm Patron of Centrepoint and Harry's Patron of Sentebale. 
mother's legacy. And also for the Diana
Memorial Fund and her five main charities.
with your mother, is that right?
William: I did, yes, when I was very small, yes. She dragged me out and I didn't know what was going on or where I was or
forever. 
And I'm very glad that she did. It's a
an awful lot for them.
And Harry, you setting up Sentebale in Lesotho, that was a way, I think you said, of continuing your mother's legacy and her work with those suffering with Aids and HIV.
Harry: Very, very much so. As I mentioned two years ago or so, Lesotho was a country that we just, we chose because of the fact that it wasn't even on the map. 
I'd never heard of it, and the problems it has with Aids. So, obviously, it's associated with all the countries that she's been to as well. So it's just a chance to sort of carry on what she left behind really.
they go about that?
William: We've got to be very good and ask Santa very nicely.
Harry: Or ring his mobile.
William: Or ring my mobile. Shut up. And there's going to be a website set up which is 'concertfordiana.com' and you can go there and find out all you need to know.
