Lynn Hershman: How would you define feminism? 
: Full sentences please.
: I went to the dictionary to look up feminism because I kept thinking of all sorts of things and it became very complicated. Basically feminism is fighting for women's rights and to give women the same rights that men have.
: When did you become aware of the feminism movement? When did you become a feminist yourself?
: Well, my father was a feminist. My mother was much more conservative than my father, and my father would always tell me, 'You can do whatever you want to do, um, you know, get the best education,' which they made sure I had, and so I always heard early on that, um, I had rights as a woman. But the shock came when I went to art school, and then when I got out of art school, what I confronted was that the men in the class, even the ones that didn't graduate, got jobs, and the women didn't. Um, and that was a, a big shock. Plus I ended up in museum work, where a number of artists eventually ended up, occasionally doing, you know, like freelance work, because the museum world attracted women, but they were very low-paying jobs.
: What was your first job in the museum and how did it happen? 
: Well it's sort of a funny story… uh, when I was at Yale as a graduate student, I was in the art and architecture program, but majoring in painting. I worked at the Yale Museum, but I did basically grunt work. I mean, I wasn't doing curatorial work. I was, basically, doing whatever they needed. Um, and… I didn't get a job like the other women in the class, and I just scoured the city looking for work, and one day I was walking by the Modern and I thought, 'Well I have to go to the bathroom,' so I went to the museum-I had a membership-went to the bathroom, while I was in the bathroom, I thought, 'Well why don't I go to personnel?' So it was one of these very serendipitous things. Um, I went to personnel and the woman who interviewed me was an Asian woman, and she said, 'Well there's a job in international circulating exhibitions. I'll send you up.' Uh, no, she didn't say that. She said, 'There is a job, but...' That was the department, but not the job I ended up with. 
And, um, the man who interviewed me was, um, a Panamanian, a black Panamanian, who was a secretary, a male, and he said, 'Well someone just quit their job. I think you'd be perfect for it,' and he introduced me to the woman who was the supervisor and I got the job. 
: What was the job?
: Well, it was called 'Exhibition Assistant,' and what you basically did was work with, uh, various curators. That's how I met Lucy Lippard. She was the first curator that I worked with, but she was a freelance person. Uh, what they had was an international and national programs of exhibitions that went to college campuses, and to foreign museums. And they would hire outside people to work with exhibition assistants to create a show that would travel. They would just package it up, and it was fairly inexpensive. They stopped doing that many years ago. But that's how I really became introduced to the women's movement, through Lucy Lippard.
I was trying to find a job. There weren't many jobs available, and uh, the women in my class were not getting any of the teaching jobs. At the time they were not hiring African Americans or women in the art schools. So I sort of scoured New York for any kind of job. I even took the welfare caseworker test. Um, and I just wandered by the Museum of Modern Art and decided since I had a membership-I had to go to the bathroom-I'd go in and use the bathroom, and then while I was in the bathroom, I thought, 'Well why don't I go to personnel while I'm here?' 
And, um, an Asian woman interviewed me and passed me along to a Panamanian secretary-a male-who said that there was a job. A woman had just quit a job in the circulating exhibitions department, and he introduced me to the woman, a woman named Inez Garson, who hired me. So that's how I ended up… it was an exhibition assistant job where you would work with, uh, freelance curators, and the first person that I worked with was Lucy Lippard, and Lucy really became a mentor for me and introduced me to the feminist movement in the art world. 
: And what was the first show that you did? 
: Oh my God, I'd have to really look at my resume for that. Um… I don't really remember. Uh, one of the early shows was 'California Prints.' Uh, what I did was go to California and I went to, uh, Latino Print Collective, I met with various artists, I went to workshops… and it became a small package exhibition. This was while I was in a curatorial department. The department of exhibitions, uh, the traveling one, was closed down within the second year of my, uh, coming to the museum. But I'd really have to look at my resume to remember that. All in all, I don't know. Perhaps I, uh, curated about, perhaps ten shows or so, uh, over a twelve year period, basically working with the collections, but, uh, I also worked with the projects, um, exhibitions, which involved painting and sculpture.
: Did it surprise you, after graduating from Yale graduate school, that you couldn't find a job?
: I was totally shocked. I was totally shocked. Well, the teaching jobs were closed to women, and I mean, if I remember clearly, I think I had only one woman teacher during all of my art training, except in high school. Uh, and that woman was a substitute for a man that was not there, so she was not really permanent. So when I think of the institutions themselves, they had very few, if any, women instructors. 
: Then who were your models?
: Well the thing is, I chose, ironically, male models while I was in art school, but one of the first, uh, experiences I had while I working at the museum was, um, Eva Hesse had a show at Cooper, um, Union, and I just… I, I, was blown away by the show. She was still alive. Uh, I remember going to the opening, and I really was very touched by her work-the soft work-and the, there was like a powdery patina on some of her pieces. I think they were latex pieces, and that affected my own work, uh, for many years after that. 
Also, Lucy had introduced me to a woman named Ree Morton who died very, very young in an accident, and I liked, very much, uh, the way she would have sections or pieces… uh, the piece was not like one cohesive rectangular stretched thing. It was, um, you know, in a sort of oddball shape and several sections. Um, that introduced to doing work that would just, you know, break the mold… seeing both of these women's, um, pieces.
: And did you work as an artist while you worked at the museum? 
: Yes. Um, I think partly because of my youth, um, I had plenty of energy, so at the end of the work day, and I lived close to the museum, close… I was on 28 street or in the Village, whatever. I would come home and I'd work until twelve or one, and then I would go to bed and get up and go back to work. Um… 
:
When you first talked to Lucy and she introduced you to the feminist art movement, did that change your sense of yourself?
: Well I think I was struggling with myself then, because there were two movements. There was both the, uh, black movement, the Civil Rights movement, because we're coming out of the '60s, uh, there's also the black artists movement, which basically, in, in some ways was male-oriented, and there was the feminist movement, and there was also the… there were also African-American women who were pointing out, uh, women's rights for African-American women. So I was sort of… pulled in a thousand directions, or aware of, um, many things that were changing, and I think all of those things coalesced to, um, sort of enhance the way I felt, or at least to make me reflect on more than I might have reflected on if I had just, uh, come out of art school and landed a job, and you know, everything was hunky-dory. 
: From your perspective, how did the feminist art movement start? 
: I don't know if I can really f-, answer that question, but I feel that a lot grew of the Art Worker's Coalition in the, from the '60s, although that was mainly male-oriented in terms of the leaders, Hans Haacke and Carl Andre. I remember attending those meetings and there were very strong issues brought up about just, I would say, everyone's rights. They were thinking mainly of artists' rights, but they were looking at the institutions, and how they were not showing, um, people of color. I don't remember their spec-, specifically focusing on women, but they were trying to examine what was going on in terms of the institutions and whether they were fair or not. And for me, that was an introduction to, uh, looking at rights.
:
What were some of the discrepancies you face in terms of wanting to make change and entering into the system? 
: Well that's complicated, because I, I have, um, conflicts relative to being a woman, and conflicts relative to being African American in dealing with the system, because when I encounter the system in the beginning, there's like a basic attitude and aura, um, that it's okay for the galleries and museums to have white-male shows only. I mean, and that was… practically a guaranteed situation back in the-, I came to New York in '67, in the late '60s and early '70s. 
The… the expectation and the acceptance of this condition made it almost impossible to break through because it was such a guaranteed attitude. I would it like a halo effect. If you were a woman artist, the halo effect was more against you. If you were a person of color, you could be Asian, black, Latino, again there was this, uh, aura or halo effect that your work is somehow less. So it was sort of a built-in attitude within the institutions, that it was acceptable, normal and preferable to have all-white, male shows. So… coming up against that both as a black person and as a woman was very daunting, because it had to do with basic attitudes, and the way the situation in the institutions was very closed.
Uh, for example, I remember, although I didn't often attend, kind of, the upper echelon parties, um, I remember going to one, and there was one dealer that came to the parties, and the impression I got was, this was a kind of, almost like insider-trading thing, where that particular dealer would have access to all these collectors, you know, and there, it was like an unspoken rule that, in a way, her artists would, um, rule, as the kids would say [laughs], and I was sort of shocked by that, that, you know, if there were black dealers, whatever, or um, this was a woman dealer, but if there were, uh, black dealers, they would be locked out of that whole social spectrum just simply because the only African Americans that were there were probably serving drinks, uh, or serving hor d'oeurves. So there was like a basic attitude that was totally institutionalized, both, both in terms of the attitude of the institution, and the attitude of their trustees, and their, um acquisition boards. 
: And how did it change?
: Well I think there were a number of pressures. One art workers coalition was out front screaming bloody murder. Uh, also there was a man named Gene Swenson who, back in the '60s, walked in front of the museum with a blue question mark, who was questioning, 'What is, what is the point of this institution?' Then there were the, uh, women's groups that were also out front. Then, uh, we unionized inside, protesting the way women were treated on the inside, and we were… we picketed twice. I was in, uh, the first strike and the second strike, uh, on the outside. So there were a lot pressures that were happening to force change. Um, also you had a number of black artists-male-who were approaching the institution who were, you know, wanting there to be change, uh, people were asking why there were no black trustees. Um, there were women trustees. Now it's interesting, there were a lot of women curators, a number of women dealers, and women trustees, but still that aura of that original institutional belief, that it's okay to be all-white and male, uh, was still very entrenched.
: You talked about insider-trader. Do you think that exists with the auctions and with the prices?
: Well I've always… yeah, I've always been suspicious, because who's to control a situation where, if I looked at it from, let's say, a dealer putting an artist's… having a friend of the dealer put an artist's work on auction, and then having another friend bid it up. I mean, who's to control that? Who's to know? Um, also, if you look at the boards of trustees, the wife may be on the board of the Whitney, the husband might be on the board of the Modern… They will know what future exhibitions are coming up, and so they can buy in advance, hoping to-, that it will be borrowed, so that'll raise the value. I mean, there are all kinds of, you know, sort of slippery things, and apparently the art world is one of the last regulated industries, you know, so that, I remember art dealers years ago, could change a price, depending on who came in.
Now they're forced to put it in writing on paper. I don't know whether they've sort of slipped away from that now if the, uh, you know, surveillance of, of this kind of system hasn't, um, continued, but years ago, there was no price list. You know, one person could walk in and it w-, would be one price, the same piece, and then another person could walk and it would be another price. So there are a lot of sort of slippery things, um, in the arts that, um, I think need attention, uh, but I don't know how they control, um, the auction houses and how you control a trustee who wants, or someone who's on an acquisition committee knows that such-and-such was purchased, so hey, why don't they buy it too? Or curators who collect, and ones that have brothers that are dealers… you know, for example, the head curator at the Modern, Bill Rubin, his brother is Larry Rubin, and his artist was Frank Stella, and Bill Rubin gave Frank Stella a show, and Larry Rubin was the dealer. So, you know, and the, and the curator also collected. So you have all these complex pressures that are happening, and the artists, I mean, in a way, probably the white male artists feel about, 'I didn't do this!' You know, 'I sort of walked into this.' Uh, but then, you know, they're taking advantage of the situation, having, um, a playing field that is not level.
: Do you think there is a discrepancy between women's prices and men's prices?
: Yes, absolutely. Absolutely. You know, and also that, um, well some of the women…
Well, if you look at, yes, there is definitely a discrepancy in the prices, also between black artists and, you know, there were rumors flying around that some curators who would collect black artists for corporations, would not want that artist's prices to go above a certain point. So there were glass ceilings for people in terms of pricing, and that had to do with black men artists as well as black women artists, who would be below the ceiling, you know, for the white men. So you would… black men, rather. So you would hear of all sorts of things, uh, like that. 
But then if you look at the art world, the women that were present were often spouses or children of famous people, so they would have a kind of inside access. But the women that were not connected had a really hard time, um, you know, breaking in it. This is in term of, of white women. But then some people will look at, for example, the fact that I worked at the Modern, and that was like having a spouse, a, a wealthy spouse or a fa-, well-known spouse, so I'm very aware that some access that I might've had was really based on the fact that I had this connection with this institution, because there were sometimes, um, ideas that maybe I could help the person who wants to help me. You know? Now, that was one thing I was glad to, sort of, because it was so hard to know who my friends were while I was there, that once I left the institution, that a lot of that fell away. You know, if meant, perhaps, some people weren't so friendly anymore, but I liked the honesty, or at least to know that someone's not being friendly to me because they feel I have this famous parent and maybe I can help them.
:
Can you say something about Free, White and 21, and how that all happened?
: Well, I was annoyed at the feminist movement, um, in terms of the racism that I was running into.
:
Can you say something about that?
: Um, well, hang on [coughs]. Water [coughs]. Okay. There were a number of things I ran into in the women's movement. For example, I remember being consulted when the women's museum was sort of getting itself together in Washington, and I asked for suggestions. And one of the things I said was, 'You should have, um, some women of color as trustees.' And the answer came back . And that was like a big shock for me. Um, also I noticed the early collectives, feminist collectives in the arts were usually all-white and near the end, like the end of the '70s, they started bringing in, uh, women of color, but I was starting to, you know, sort of yell bloody murder about the fact that most of the collectives, uh, were white. 
Uh, then I found, even in, you know, in, uh, in being a member of A.I.R., I would run into, um, things where people would say literally, 'I don't know I'm black.' In other words, there was this attitude that I just wasn't whatever their perception of, you know, through stereotypes and all, black was, but I wasn't it, and that it was annoying, cause I didn't know, um, that I was black. So I would run into attitudes like that. Um… can I look at my notes? 
There was an exhibition on the Upper East Side, one of the Upper East Side galleries, and the white women were rejoicing, 'It's fifty percent women!' So then I said, 'Well are there any women of color? Asian, black, Latino, whatever…' And they said, 'No, but it's fifty percent women!' So you would find this sort of blank stare if you brought up any issue, um, of race in terms of there being women of color and they should be included. I also went to one of the prominent women's groups, who will remain nameless [laughs], um, and said, 'You should be dealing with issues relative to people of color as well,' and the basic argument was, 'This sullies, uh, our issues about feminism, that those two things do not mix.' And within the organization, there was a real struggle and eventually it decided to deal with issues concerning people of color as well, which really strengthened what they were, you know, doing. But the general attitude of the some of the women was that dealing with issues concerning, uh, race were really, sort of, off the mark in terms of feminism.
Then I remember one of the things that changed me a lot was being in a consciousness-raising group. But what I noticed… I was the only black person in the group, and what I noticed if I brought up issues relative to racism I ran into, I was told to basically shut up because I was dealing with political things, these are political issues. And I said, 'Well these issues… I encounter this as, as part of my daily life,' and the attitude of the other person was basically, 'Well I don't. And it really, it's not of any use to me to discuss this.' So I ran into those kinds of attitudes, uh, within the feminist movement and it really made me mad.
So, um, then it's like a lot of things changed. There were several things. One, I left the museum, partly as a result of, uh, there was an exhibition at Artist's Space called 'Nigger Drawings,' which was a show by a white male artist, abstraction, um, and it was in charcoal, and if you called Artist's Space, they said, 'Well charcoal is black and black means Nigger.' Not good! And a number of feminists supported us when we picketed Artist's Space about this, but the attitude of some of the people at the museum-I would say the majority-was that we were censoring an artist. But at the time, women were censored out of the system, um, and people of color were censored out of the system, but that, to them, wasn't censorship. Only if you question a white male and his work, then that was censorship. So that really got on my nerves. 
I also worked with someone who was very difficult and I was weary of dealing with the problems. Um, you know, it was said that I left because I wanted more time for my work. Uh, I was very productive in the '70s, even with a full-time job, um, but I would say just the aggravation of working for someone who was so negative towards me during the day, I just felt, you know, 'I'm just too depressed from this!' So I, I left the museum.
:
Were they negative to you because you were not a white male?
: Um, well I think it had to do with this person's personality… their individual personality. Some people at the museum were very, very nice to me, and some weren't so nice to me. Uh, I remember there was one, uh, white woman when I first joined the museum who went to South Africa while it had apartheid, and so she threw a party and invited all of the people in the circulating exhibitions department but me. 
Um, she basically had an all-white party to talk about South Africa, so, I was very, you know, aware, um, you know, of that situation, so I would run into, you know, funny attitudes, but this individual I worked for was very difficult, and I just, you know, had worked with her basically ten of the twelve years I was there, and um, a job came available at Stony Brook in terms of my being able to tryout for, so I did. And I got the job, and I left. But it was just, you know, I would say the pressure of feeling the attitudes were, you know, I was moving politically, and I was be-, I would be sort of trapped in aspect in a place where the attitudes were basically that white males were sort of sacrosanct, you couldn't question them. Um, so I left, and I've been there twenty-six years, at Stony Brook, teaching.
:
Tell us what Free, White, and 21 was. 
: Oh, Free, White and 21 really came out of my aggravation with the women's movement, or at least that was one of the, uh, starting points. Uh, but what I did was I was played two parts, um, and it was sort of telling-
:
It's videotape?
: It's videotape, yes, a twelve-minute videotape. And I told stories about experiences my mother had and experiences I had with racism, but I play both parts. I play, um, the white woman who I have had say to me-this was sort of hypothetical white woman-but, it happened in reality, where if I explained I had run into a situation, uh, and I felt a situation was racist, I would be told, 'You're paranoid.' Uh, I have never had that happen to me, you know, you really must be paranoid, and I repeat that over and over in the tape, but then I take on the persona of the white woman, and I had stage makeup and a blonde wig. 
And a number of, um, people were offended by it, were very angry about it. I first showed the tape, uh, at A.I.R., uh, in the Dialectics of Isolation exhibition that Anna Mendieta curated. And I had a metronome on top, so you would have this ticking, and then the dialogue of the tape. Then, uh, later on that year it was shown at Franklin Furnace as one of, you know, sort of their tape evenings, and, uh, people were pretty upset by it, so I would get, you know, several reactions, um, one, it was, uh, sent to a festival and they felt it was too hostile a tape. Uh, but oddly enough it's had life, it had legs for many years, I think because it brought up issues that, uh, people are aware of, you know, still being a problem. Um, in it, I would say, oh, for example, I'm trying to think of one of the stories in it… But they were all true stories. 
I remember being in a wedding, you know, of all places Kennebunkport, Maine, that's because I had gone to Yale, so there were people that I had friendships with, and I was invited to be in this wedding, but I'm sure I was the only black person for miles. And I remember the minister decided I was really cute, and, uh, but he was a white minister, and he decided he'd come to New York and we could have some fun. I mean, just that attitude in terms of who I was as a woman, to him, um, and just basically that I was isolated in that environment. So stories like that. 
Or, um, when I was… uh, this is sort of sad, although I always get horrified when I think about, and I can kind of conjure up the emotions. When I was in kindergarten, uh, this was in the '40s, so it was during segregation, I was one of the few black children in kindergarten, if not the only one, in this particular one in Philadelphia, they had potty-time. 
You know, they would have, um, nap time and potty time, whatever, or basically nap time, if you had to go to the potty, you raise your hand. And I remember one of the white teachers, I believe, believed that whites and blacks should not use the same bathroom, and so what she did was tie me to the cot with sheets. I remember it vividly. I remember lying there, and I said, 'I'm not going to pee on myself.' I'm a little kid. Um, and I just, you know, talk about, you know, this experience, which is always a shock, cause people can't believe this happened, but it did. Um, so its stories like that, um, twelve minutes of stories like that. And then this dialogue back and forth, 'Well that never happened to me, you really must be paranoid.' You know, in the blonde wig. And then at the end, I won't tell you what the end is cause it's kind of a surprise, um… I just felt that I needed to get out, you know, just… it was the right medium. I'm not a video artist. It was the right medium for this particular expression, or this particular creative project.
But the summer before, I had left the museum, and then October, my first of my job, I was in a bad car accident, so I also had a head injury, which made me hysterical [laughs]. Um, and in the tape, I wrap my head. A lot of people wonder why do I wrap my head? And that's because I had the head injury. So there's stuff that's sort of feedback feeds back into the tape from my, uh, experiences in the, sort of, near past, I guess you could say. 
:
And you were a founder of A.I.R.?
:
Pause for a second. So if you could just, in two sentences, say what Free, White and 21 was. 
: Free, White, and 21 uh, the tape, was about discrimination and um, I made it in 19-, the summer of 1980, when I was in my thirties, uh, and I made it in my studio, uh, in New York, with the help of downtown, um, television. I had both a woman cameraperson and a woman, I guess the word would be producer, someone who was sort of directing me, not in terms of the structure of the tape, but just made sure technically everything was okay.
:
And you would describe it as being a tape about discrimination?
: I would describe it as a tape about discrimination. Um… my experience, both my mother, um,'s experience as well as, as my own. Mostly my own. 
: How did A.I.R. get started?
: Oh, um, yes… uh there was a basic founding group, um, for A.I.R., sort of your basic four or five people, and they um, found the additional members.
I can't remember whether our membership was twenty. I think it was somewhere around twenty, but I'm not… I'm not clear about it. Um, I had put my slides in an artist's space registry. They, uh, saw my slides and they came to visit me. At the time, I was living at Westbeth Artists Housing on West Street. And they, you know, came to look at my work, and then they got back to me and said they would like me to be a member, so I was in the core, sort of- 
: What was it?
: What was A.I.R.? Well it was the first women's cooperative. They wanted to address the fact that it was very hard to find a, a show of women's work in Soho. So what we did is, we, um, rented a storefront. It was more than a storefront, it was like a ground floor loft, um, on Wooster Street. I think it was 97 Wooster Street, and we gutted the inside, and we built with our own hands, um, the gallery. What we did is we set up a series of two-person exhibitions in the beginning, because there wasn't enough time for everyone to have a singles show in the first year. Uh, we started off with a group exhibition of half the gallery, and then we also had another group exhibition of the other half of the gallery. Then we started having a series of two-person shows, and the first two-person show I was in was with Harmony Hammond, and I showed paintings. And then my second show-I believe that was, I think that was in '71 or '72, no '71-and then my second one-person show, or, hmm, my second show, my first one-person show, um, was in 1973, and I started to show… in fact it was the first time that I sh-, showed the little punch pieces that I do, although the early paintings were the beginning of my using a hole puncher. But I would spray through templates on, um, on primed canvas. 
: What do you think is the most successful thing you've done. 
: That is tricky. Um, that's a tricky question because… oddly enough, that tape, I think, has been seen… more people have seen my tape than have actually, I believe, seen my physical art, uh, because of the transportability of media, in a way. And it's been shown in exhibitions all over. I think that, perhaps the most important painting I've done is up at the Wadsworth Athenaeum and it's about, um, slavery and ancestry, uh, being my family's very mixed, and um, just looking at the fact we have Christian blood, Jewish blood, we have Indian blood, we have, um, black, white, um, Caribbean, you know, it's just we're all, we're a big mish mash. Um, but it's basically about slavery and how these slave women were raped by the white men during slav-, and that's why we have so many mixtures, additionally mixtures. Um, but that, it was part of these, the slave codes for if a, um, African or African-American male slave objected to the rape of his wife or spouse or whatever, he would be killed. This was in, uh, South Carolina law. And, uh, the abolitionists knew this, so they were publishing pamphlets and I was able to get the text from a book that, uh, had to do with slavery that was published by the New York Times years ago. Um, so I think that's one of my most important pieces, but some people feel my dot pieces are the most important pieces. 
You know, the things that I did in abstraction. The irony is, that's how they feel now, thirty years after I did them. You know, uh, so it's odd. It, it's taken so much time. But I did what I did, you know, not in order to achieve notoriety, it's just simply a process. And I think the most innovation occurred in my work during the '70s, you know, when I was, uh, you know, being pulled apart by all the different movements, you know, trying to understand and grow, and also when I was exposed to a tremendous amount of art at the museum.
:
Which exhibitions that you saw had the biggest impact on you?
: Well I would say the biggest impact, uh, was Eva Hesse's show at, I think it was the Cooper Hewitt Museum was downtown, and it was at the Cooper Hewitt when it was at Cooper Union, or in that area, mainly because of the materials, uh, the latex, and the powdery stuff. That really it-, stuck with me for years.
:
How did she get her shows?
: I don't know. I don't know. I don't know who her connections were. I don't know. There were very few women, though, that were being given shows. Um, but I remember it was a big show, and she was there. Seemed like a nice person. And, um, I just was blown away by the work. Now, there are other things that affected my work. I would say seeing African textiles, um, I went to Africa for the museum in '73 and spent almost two months there, um, and I saw, you know, textiles in Nigeria and so forth, and they had an African textiles show. 
:
There were a lot of conflicts within groups. Could you talk about some of those conflicts and what you think could have made the feminist movement more successful 
: Well I think it's… I think it's kind of difficult to have it any different than what it was, given the situation with coming out of the Civil Rights movement, um, or moving forward after the Civil Rights movement. Uh, we're also dealing with issues of, of women's rights when there were women in the past who, you know, dealt with issues of women's rights and then everything kind of shut down for a while. Um, I don't know how it could have been different. It would have been nice if the groups had been integrated in the beginning, but then there are also issues of class… that there are a number of, of people of color, as well as a number of white women who have different issues because of class issues, that they are dealing with poverty, um, so that I think if you look at the middle class white feminists and you take them to Appalachia, you're going to have a whole different set of problems, you know, between the urban, you know, art world artist feminist white woman, and what is happening, let's say, in a mining town.
What were the women's issues there? Uh, it's just very complicated. I think it's almost what I would call, or the art world calls, when something is inherent within a, um, a damage that's inherent within an art-, they call it 'inherent vice.' I think that these conflicts are a kind of inherent vice that you'll have no matter what, because the playing field itself has never been level, uh, and the fact that there… take away issues of race, there are very strong class conflicts. There are class conflicts within the black community. I'm sure they're within the white community.
: And what about east versus west coast?
: I don't know enough. I don't know enough, um, I got the sense that on the west coast there were definite personalities… like Miriam Schapiro and Judy Chicago, and it was almost like a cult, you know? And, um, you know I always sort of was uncomfortable with the fact that the women were anonymous who made the Dinner Party, or at least, I heard about Judy Chicago, but I didn't hear about the other women. So that always made me uncomfortable, because then I would think of, um, I lived in Japan for a while, and if a woman did a project, a man would always get the credit. And so to me it was like another form of the same thing, where, uh, she may not have done it intentionally, but all of these women and their labor make the Dinner Party, but her name is on top. 
Um, I was also annoyed at something that was occurring here called KOS: Kids of survival, where you have a white male, um, and it was Tim Rollins, and then you have these faceless kids of color, uh, who do these fantastic artworks, but what happens when that child without Tim Rollins goes to the art gallery and says, 'I want to show my work.' They're probably going to be rejected. Um, so, you know, I was seeing it as the same thing, where you have one person with a name, um, sort of getting credit for all the work that, collectively, someone has done. To me it was the same thing as what was happening in Japan.
:
What young artists now do you admire?
: Well, you know, I feel like I'm kind of out of it since my father's been ill, really, for three years. I feel like I've just sort of lost, uh, momentum in terms of knowing what's going on. But there's some artists that I do admire, um, there's a woman named Joyce Scott, and I don't know how much younger she is than I am, uh, who works with beads. She's in the Baltimore area, uh, with small seed beads, and she does these incredible, um, sort of fig-, figures, which are about African-American issues, but they're rather extraordinary cause they kind of mix whimsy and kind of, um, kind of the ser-, seriousness of the situation, but its… they're beautiful. They're, they're wonderful beaded things.
Um, there's also… there are actually two ceramicists that I like, Syd Carpenter from Philadelphia and Sana Musasama, who's out in… I believe she's in Jamaica-Queens, I think. Um, but she's traveled all over the world, and gone into very, what I would say, what I would call tough situations cause I've traveled a lot, but she will go, uh, into Vietnam or Cambodia, you know, and she'll go way up country where no one has seen a black person, and she's run into, you know, complex reactions to her, but her work is very, uh, sympathetic to women's issues. 
 Syd Carpenter is basically ceramic sculpture. It's very, uh, stark. And then, um, there's a woman that I like very much, Helen Ramsaran, who uses, um, bronze, but she has spent an enormous amount of time traveling and taking sabbaticals and going to Africa for like months. And then, she has often had accidents in countries where she's visited, so she ended up breaking her foot in Africa, and then, how did she deal with the health system? And how people dealt with her because she was, um, you know, h-, having a hard time getting around and the whole male-female conflict, uh, but she does a number of very beautiful works, which incorporates, sort of, African imagery, but it's not… it's closer to a Martin Puryear, you know, it's not, shall we say, extremely figurative, but she'll take a ladder and it'll be so poetic, incredibly poetic, and she usually uses, uh, a patinated bronze. So those are the artists that I'm aware of, but I'd be aware of more if I would, you know, just get out.
:
What advice would you give to young artists?
: Well… be tenacious, but also protective. Uh, when I say tenacious, don't take no for an answer. Just, uh, for example, I heard this wonderful story. Joyce Kozloff had applied for almost twenty years for the Rome Prize. Now who's going to apply for a grant for twenty years? You know? She got it on the twentieth year. So I hear that and it's like, oh my God! You know, don't give up. Just, you know, keep at it. But also be protective. One of the things I saw, um back in the '70s, there were two women who were very good friends, who were both in the feminist art movement. One had a very famous boyfriend, and the two women would hang out in each other's studio, they lived in the same building and so forth, and the one with the famous boyfriend who had the connections, got the show first, and what the woman who had the famous boyfriend did was she took the ideas of the friend and showed them as her own. And that really hurt my heart. You know? I mean, the trust, a lot-
:
You can't say who it is?
: No, I won't. Um, the trust, you know, that was there that-, people were very open during the women's movement, through the consciousness-raising groups, you know, in terms of talking about your issues and whatever, and sharing work, and whatev-, sharing work in terms of ideas… expressing what you were doing. And, um, to me this was a real violation. So I just warn people, there are predators, you know, also be cautious with your work. Uh, be careful who you invite to your studio, you know? Um, you need that sense of caution, I think especially if you're in New York, because there's so much deadly competition. 
Um years ago I did statistics about the arts and there were over 90,000 artists in New York. That was in the '80s, and I'm sure it's way up there now.
:
Do you think things have changed for women artists?
: Well I would say for white women it's gotten better. Uh, there's certainly more exhibitions… Elizabeth Murray at the Modern, um, I think it's better. I don't think it's so much better for black artists. I think it's maybe a little bit better, but what I have found is, the black artists that, um, use negative racial stereotypes of black people, will get in, um, but long before someone who doesn't. Um, and I find that, you know, very disturbing. But no, I think it's improved for white women. Um, I think even… the attitude of women who are in the professions, the museum professions, has gotten much better. 
For example, I remember my old boss at the Modern produced a coffee table print book about prints, uh, that was all male. And even back then, all white male. She got it [laughs]. In other words, people went after her for it. They don't, they wouldn't dare do that now. You know? So there is an attitude that's shifted that the old, sort of, expectation of it being all-white and male, that has shifted, that you dare not do that, even if you feel that it should be all white and male, you dare not make that such a public statement. Uh, so I believe that attitude has changed considerably. But I think we have a long way to go… long way to go.
:
Could you talk a little bit about some of the landmark exhibitions or collectives for women of color?
: Well… I was kind of out of it when I came to New York. I wasn't from New York, so I didn't, sort, of, get the inside track in terms of many of the groups that were, uh, happening. There are a couple of things I wanted to mention. Uh, there was a group called 'Where We At?' which formed in 1970, and Carol Blank was the president, but the two artists that I think of the most are Dindga McCannon and Faith Ringgold. There was another group called Weusi, which was a, a African-American male and female group that, they were trying to help artists back in the '60s. Uh, in terms of exhibitions… huh… the, uh, sort of more male-oriented, um, black artist groups… there were a number of exhibitions. There was one at the Whitney, uh, and there was sort of a lot of squabbling about it, partly because it was… I don't know, sort of nefarious stuff, I think of as what men do [laughs], um, where the men that were on the top were trying to get their work into these various collections so they were telling, um, the other artists of color to step back, but then, because I was on the inside, I could see this maneuvering.
So I became sort of, um, sort of disillusioned, you know, about, uh, some of the… uh, shall we say, machinations of the, the black male artist groups, because it seemed kind of disingenuous to push people away while you were kind of pushing your own work, uh, forward. I'd have to really look at my resume, because I was in a number of the shows, uh, to name those particular shows. Um, but I think… a group, I would call it a group or a family that I think have done a lot in terms of documenting, uh, what went on, uh the Hatch-Billops Collection down in Soho has a remarkable collection of oral tapes, or oral history, and they also made documents at various occasions, uh, so that there is actually a physical history left. Uh, they interviewed, they have a program every Sunday where they interview an artist, and then they have a beautiful publication they put out once a year, so that there's, um, a published oral history of various artists. They're interested in both African-American and Asian, um, so they're an organization to go to, you know, if you want to find actually documentation.
There's a very good book out, um, published by Midmarch Arts Press called Gumbo Ya Ya, and it's a compendium of African-American women, and you can read essays on, I mean, it's about maybe that thick, that big, um, you can read essays about African-American women, so I think one has to sort of thread one's way through the book to find, uh, some interesting, uh, reference to both exhibitions and groups that formed. But 'Where We At?' was a group that you, most people knew about, uh, but there's very little documentation on them.
: Did you know about W.A.S.A.BA.L?
: W.A.S.A.BA.L I didn't know about. I think I have heard ab-, about them, but I don't know… Oh I didn't know that! Oh, possibly it was mentioned cause I attended some of Faith's lectures. Perhaps she has mentioned it.
: Were you influenced by Faith at all?
: No, no… I think part of it, I was from Philadelphia so I was kind of like a foreign body here, and so I wasn't inside, uh, any Harlem groups or… and plus I was considered, um, not to be trusted because I worked for the Modern. I would run into that, uh, while I, you know, was with a number of black groups…uh, the, the sense was that I worked, you know, for them, and uh, there was anger that I couldn't suddenly open a door and all of sudden bring in a lot of black artists, you know? Some of the women felt like that too. Some of the white women. But I was in prints, and I was fighting my own battles there. Um, I think I attempted to make balanced shows, um, but I was dealing with the collection, which itself wasn't balanced. Um, I just felt my hands were fairly tied, um, and I was dealing with someone who was very difficult, and had an attitude of her own in that she produced a book that had no women in it at all, and certainly no people of color.
: What were some of the biggest innovations in the feminist art movement?
: I would say new materials. I mean, the fact that some of my early pieces, as a result of seeing Hesse, used powder, I used to use glitter. I remember when I was in art school, they would always say, 'Pink, pink, don't use pink!' But if a guy used red and white, it was red and white. But if a woman used red and white, it was pink, you know? So there were certain attitudes about color, you know, that… I would do pink paintings, you know, on purpose, or real pastel-ly things. Um, I even added perfume to some of my paintings. 
You know, just, just feeling that you had the freedom to do that, I really got that from the women's movement. And I think my earliest opportunities to show came through the women's movement. 
Uh, but in terms of I'd say materials, I would say working with soft fabrics… I remember there was um, a woman named Anne Healy at A.I.R., and she would do these wonderful, sort of, nylon kites that would, you know, be stretched over a waterway or whatever. I remember that influenced my work. At the same time, I was seeing African textiles that were free flowing. So I took my paintings off of the spectrum… at that point. So I would say materials, um, and… hang on [coughs & drinks water]. 
I also think that… the belief that you could deal with whatever you wanted to, through the consciousness-raising groups you were dealing with material that was almost taboo… very private. That would come out in the work. You know, I remember, and I can't remember the name of the artist, there was a film about a woman going through her, the stages of being married and so forth, but just the agony of waiting and waiting and waiting. That, I don't think, without feminism, would've been, um, a subject.
And I know my own work, in the '90s, where I was dealing with issues of slavery, um, just family abuse issues, just in general, uh, issues that you normally wouldn't put in public, I would not have dealt with that without the feminist, uh, consciousness-raising group, because I moved from that, um, group to the tw-, twelve-step program, and I chose to be in the twelve-step program that was in, um, the gay center here, because I found that gay women were far more open and honest, uh, so I went through that for about three or four years.
Uh, and then family things just sort of rolled me back into, you know, just going back to when my mother died, and then my father became ill and so forth. So I kind of dropped those programs, but I constantly was going to twelve-step programs for
whatever, you know, uh, and I would never, I think, have opened my consciousness if I had not been in a consciousness-raising group.
: Faith Wilding! Right! Yes. Yeah, that was intense. That was very moving, very moving. But I just, I never saw that in men's work at all. Um, I remember thinking of men's work as 'Look, Ma, no hands!' That there was no sense of wanting to have the touch in the work, and I found that women's work had to do with the touch of the individual, as opposed to a machine that would do the work for the artist. 
: What are you working on now?
: Well now it's kind of tricky. I've just, I've actually almost not done anything since mid-December because my father was ill and I had to pack up his apartment, and you know, I'm the only child, and the only sole organizer of everything. Um, I was working before he be-, went into hospice, I was working on dot pieces. I've sort of resurrected them and I was doing three-dimensional prints, and then I found some hold punchers. I, I found a hole punch manufacturer who made these-I call them little pizzas; they're about this big, big holes-and so I started working on, on, on a larger format.
I also want to… I just did a painting about George Bush called Coo. Um, that I thought would get me into a lot of trouble, but I was amazed. It, it was in the faculty show. No one really said anything, you know, or threatened me about it.
But the next painting I want to do has to do with looking at 9/11 and lynching. In other words, looking at homegrown terrorism and what happened here in the city. And I wanted to also emphasize, but I became squeamish about it, uh, in terms of using any of the photo documents. The thing that I guess… I guess the word is awed me, or appalled me was, can you imagine getting dressed, going to work, you're on a high floor of the tower, and the next thing you know, you have to jump out of a window to save your life. Eighty stories. There were pictures… in other words, there were people who, they had to deal with either the fire, burning to death, or jumping out the window. And jumping out the window was preferable. And they had pictures of the arches-the upper arches-with people holding on… and letting go. And they said like over two hundred people jumped. You rarely hear that statistic. Uh, so I wanted to also deal with the horror of what happened, um, and focusing on the people that jumped. But, then as I did more reading, it seemed like, um, having anything that showed anyone that could be recognized would be a bad thing… for the families. Um, so I have, have to sort of rethink and retrench in terms of what I'll do, um, with it in terms of linking the lynching and 9/11.
